THE 48 LAWS OF POWER 



ROBERT GREENE has a degree in classical studies 
and has been an editor at Esquire and otter magazines. 
He is also a playwright and lives in Los Angeles. 


JOOST ELFERS is the producer of The 48 Laws of Power 
and also of 

The Secret Language of Birthdays 
with Gary Goldschneider 

The Secret Language of Relationships 
with Gary Goldschneider 


May with Your Food 
with Saxton Freymann 



THE 48 LAWS O F 


P 

O 

w 

E 

R 

ROBERT GREENE 

A JOOST ELFFERS PRODUCTION 


P 

PROFILE BOOKS 



This paperback edition published in 2000 

Reprinted 2001* 2002 

First published in Great Britain in 1998 by 
Profile Books Ltd 
58A Hatton Garden 
London EC1N8LX 

First published in the United States in 1998 by 
Viking* a division of Penguin Putnam Inc. 

Copyright © Robert Greene and Joost Elffers, 1998 

A portion of this work first appeared in 'Ihe Utne Reader 

Typeset in BE Baskerville 
Printed and bound in Italy by 
Legoprint S.p.a. - Lavis (TN) 

The moral right of the authors has been asserted. 

All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying* recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of both the copyright 

owner and the publisher of this book. 

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 


ISBN 1 86197 278 4 



A 'Treasury of Jewish Folklore by Nathan Ausubel. Copyright © 1948, 1976 by Crown Publishers, Inc. Reprinted by 
permission of Crown Publishers, Inc. 

The Chinese Looking Glass by Dennis Bloodworth. Copyright © 1966, 1967 by Dennis Bloodworth. By permission of 
Ferrar, Straus and Giroux. 

The Book of the Courtier by Baldesar Castiglione, translated by George Bull; Penguin Books (London). Copyright © 
George Bull, 1967, 

The Golden Dream: Seekers of El Dorado by Walker Chapman; Bobbs-MerrilL Copyright © 1967 by Walker Chapman. 

The Borgias by Ivan Cloulas, translated by Gilda Roberts; Franklin Watte, Inc. Copyright © 1987 by Librairie 
Artheme Fayard. Translation copyright © 1989 by Franklin Watts, Inc. 

Various Fables from Various Places, edited by Diane Di Prima; Capricorn Books / G. P. Putnam’s Sons. © 1960 G. P. 
Putnam’s Sons. 

Armenian Folk-tales and Fables, translated by Charles Downing; Oxford University Press. © Char les Downing 1972. 

The Little Brown Book of Anecdotes, edited by Clifton Fadiman; Little, Brown and Company, Copyright © 1985 by 
Little, Brown and Company (Tnc.) 

The Power of the Charlatan by Crete de Francesco, translated by Miriam Beard. Copyright, 1939, by Yale University 
IVess. By permission of Yale University Press. 

The Oracle: A Manual of the Art ofDiscretimby Baltasar Gracian, translated by L, B. Walton; Orion Press. 

Behind the Scenes of Royal Palaces in Korea (Yi Dynasty) by Ha Tae-hung. Copyright 0 1983 by Ha Taehung. By permis¬ 
sion of Yonsei University Press, Seoul. 

The Histories by Herodotus, translated by Aubrey de Selincourt, revised by A. R. Bum; Penguin Books (London). 
Copyright © the Estate of Aubrey de Selincourt, 1954. Copyright © A. R Bum, 1972. 

Hollywood by Carson Kanin (Viking). Copyright © 1967, 1974 by T. F. T. Corporation. 

Fables from Africa, collected by Jan Knappert; Evan Brothers Limited (London). Collection © 1980Jan KnapperL 

The Great Fables of AU Nations, selected by Manuel Komroff; Tudor Publishing Company. Copyright, 1928, by Dial 
Press, Inc. 

Selected Fables by Jean de La Fontaine, translated by James Michic; Penguin Books (London). Translation copyright 
©James Midhie, 1979. 

The Romance of ike Rose by Guillaume de Lords, translated by Charles Dahlberg; Princeton University Press. 

The Complete Essays by Michel de Montaigne, translated by M. A. Screech ; Penguin Books (London). Translation 
copyright © M. A. Screech, 1987,1991. 

A Book of Five Rings by Miyamoto Musashi, translated by Victor Harris; Overlook Press, Copyright © 1974 by Victor 
Harris. 

The New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha, revised standard version, edited by Herbert G. May and Bruce M. 
Metzger; Oxford University Press, Copyright © 1973 by Oxford University Press, Inc. 

Makers of Rome: Nine Lives by Plutarch, translated by Ian Scott-Kil vert; Penguin Books (London). Copyright © Ian 
Scott-Kilvert, 1965. 

The Rise and Fall of Athens: Nine Greek Lives by Plutarch, translated by Ian Scott-Kilvert; Penguin Books (London). 
Copyright © Ian Scott-Kilvert, i960. 

Cha-no-yu: The Japanese Tea Ceremony by A. L. Sadler, Charles E. Tbtde Company. €> 1962 by Charles E. Tuttle Co. 

Amoral Politics: Hie Persistent Truth ofMachiavellism by Ben-Ami Scharfstein; State University of New York Press. 

© 1995 State University of New York. 

Caravan of Dreams by Idries Shah; Octagon Press (London). Copyright © 1970, 1980 by Idries Shah. 

Tales of the Dervishes by Idries Shah. Copyright © Idries Shah, 1967, Used by permission of Penguin Putnam Inc. and 
Octagon Press (London). 

The Craft of Power by R. G. H. Siu; John Wiley & Sons. Copyright © 1979 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

The Subtle Ruse: The Book of Arabic Wisdom and Guile, translated by Rene R. Khawam; East-West Publications. Copy¬ 
right © 1980 English translation East-West Publications (U.K.) Ltd. 

The Art of War by Sun-tzu, translated by Thomas Cleary; Shambhala Publications. © 1988 by Thomas Cleary. 

The Art of War by Sun-tzu, translated by Yuan Shibing. © 1987 by General Tao Hanshang. Used by permission of 
Sterling Publishing Co., Inc., 387 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10016. 

The History of the Peloponnesian War by Thucydides, translated by Rex Warner; Penguin Books (London). Translation 
copyright Rex Warner, 1954. 

The Thurber Carnival by James Thurber; HarperCollms. Copyright 1945 by James Thurber. 

The Court Artist: On the Ancestry of the Modem Artist by Martin Wamke, translated by David McLintock. Translation © 
Maison des Sciences de PHomme and Cambridge University Press 1993. By permission of Cambridge University 
Press. 

The Con Game and * Yellow Kid ” Weil: The Autobiography of the Famous Con Artist as told to W. T. Brannon; Dover Publi¬ 
cations. Copyright © 1948 by W. T. Brannon. 



To Anna Biller, and to my parents 

R. G. 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


First I would like to thank Anna Biller* who helped edit and research this book, and whose in¬ 
valuable insights played a critical role in the shape and content of The 48 Laws. Without her, 
none of this would have been possible. 

I must also thank my dear friend Michiel Schwarz who was responsible for involving me in 
the art school Fabrika in Italy and introducing me there to Joost Elffers, my partner and producer 
of The 48 Laws of Power. It was in the scheming world of Fabrika that Joost and I saw the timeless¬ 
ness of Machiaveili and from our discussions in Venice, Italy, this book was bom. 

I would like to thank Henri Le Goubin, who supplied me with many Machiavellian anec¬ 
dotes over the years, particularly concerning the numerous French characters who play such a 
large role in this book. 

I would also like to thank Les and Suraiko Biller, who lent me their library on Japanese his¬ 
tory and helped me with the Japanese Tea Ceremony part of the book. Similarly, I must thank 
my good friend Elizabeth Yang who advised me on Chinese history. 

A book like this depended greatly on the research material available and I am particularly 
grateful to die UCLA Research Library; I spent many pleasant days wandering through its in¬ 
comparable collections. 

My parents, Laurette and Stanley Green, deserve endless thanks for their patience and 
support. 

And I must not forget to pay tribute to my cat, Boris, who kept me company throughout the 
never-ending days of writing. 

Finally, to those people in my life who have so skillfully used the game of power to manipu¬ 
late, torture, and cause me pain over the years, I bear you no grudges and I thank you for sup¬ 
plying me with inspiration for The 48 Laws of Power. 

Robert Greene 


via 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



CONTENTS 


PREFACE page xvii 

LAW I page 1 

NEVER OUTSHINE THE MASTER 

Always make those above you feel comfortably superior In your desire to please or impress them, do not go 
too far in displaying your talents or you might accomplish the opposite—inspire fear and insecurity. Make 
your masters appear more brilliant than they are and you will attain the heights of power, 

LAW 2 pageS 

NEVER PUT TOO MUCH TRUST IN FRIENDS, 

LEARN HOW TO USE ENEMIES 

Be wary offiends—they will betray you move quickly s, for they am easily aroused to entry. They also become 
spoiled and tyrannical. But hire a former enemy and he will be more loyal than a friend , because he has more 
to prove. In fact,, you have more to fear from friends than from enemies. If you have no enemies, find a way to 
make them. 


LAW 3 page 16 

CONCEAL YOUR INTENTIONS 

Keep people off-balance and in the dark by never revealing the purpose behind your actions. If they have no 
clue what you are up to, they cannot prepare a defense.. Guide them far enough dozen the wrong path » envelop 
them in enough smoke, and by the time they realize your intentions, it will be too late. 

LAW 4 page 31 

ALWAYS SAY LESS THAN NECESSARY 

When you are trying to impress people with words, the more you say, the more common you appear, and the less 
in control. Even if you are saying something banal, it will seem original if you make it vague; open-ended, 
and sphinxlike . Powerful people impress and, intimidate by saying less. The more you say, the more likely you 
are to say somethingfoolish. 


LAW 5 page 37 

SO MUCH DEPENDS ON REPUTATION—GUARD IT WITH YOUR LIFE 
Reputation is the cornerstone of pouter. Through reputation alone you can intimidate and win; once it slips, 
however, you are vulnerable, and, will be attacked on all skies. Make your reputation unassailable. Always be 
alert to potential attacks and thwart, them before they happen. Meanwhile, learn to destroy your enemies by 
opening holes in their own reputations. Then stand aside and let public opinion hang them. 


LAW 6 page 44 

COURT ATTENTION AT ALL COST 

Everything is judged by its appearance; what is unseen counts for nothing. Never let yourself get lost in the 
croiod, then ., or'buried in oblivion. Stand out. Be conspicuous, at all cost. Make yourself a magnet of attention 
by appearing larger, more colorful, more mysterious than the bland and timid masses. 


ix 


CONTENTS 



LAW 7 page 56 

GET OTHERS TO DO THE WORK FOR YOU, BUT ALWAYS TAKE THE CREDIT 
Use the wisdom, knowledge, and legwork of other people to further your own cause. Not only will such assis¬ 
tance save you valuable time and energy, it will give you a godlike aura of efficiency and speed. In the end 
your helpers will be. forgotten and you will be remembered. Never do yourself what others can do for you. 

L AW 8 page 62 

MAKE OTHER PEOPLE COME TO YOU—USE BAIT IF NECESSARY 
When you force the other person to act, you are the one in control It is always better to make your opponent 
come to you, abandoning his own plans in die process. Lure him with fabulous gains—then attack . You hold 
the cards. 


LAW 9 page 69 

WIN THROUGH YOUR ACTIONS, NEVER THROUGH ARGUMENT 
Any momentary triumph you think you have gained through argument is really a Pyrrhic victory: The resent¬ 
ment and ill will you stir up is stronger and lasts longer than any momentary change of opinion. It is much 
more powerful to get others to agree with you through your actions, without saying a word. Demonstrate, do 
not explicate. 


LAW' 10 page 76 

INFECTION: AVOID THE UNHAPPY AND UNLUCKY 
You can die from someone else’s misery-—emotional states are as infectious as diseases. You may feel you are 
helping the drowning man but you are only precipitating your own disaster. The unfortunate sometimes draw 
misfortune on themselves; they will also draw it on you. Associate with the happy and fortunate instead. 

LA W 11 page 82 

LEARN TO KEEP PEOPLE DEPENDENT ON YOU 
To maintain your independence you must always be needed and wanted. The more you are relied on, the more 
freedom you have. Make people depend on you for their happiness and prosperity and you have nothing to fear, 
Never teach them enough so that they can do without you. 

LAW 12 page 89 

USE SELECTIVE HONESTY AND GENEROSITY TO DISARM YOUR VICTIM 
One sincere and honest move will cover over dozens of dishonest ones. Open-hearted gestures of honesty and 
generosity bring dawn the guard of even the most suspicious people. Once your selective honesty opens a hole in 
their armor, you can deceive and manipulate them at will. A timely gift—a Trojan horse—will serve the same 
purpose. 


LAW 13 page 95 

WHEN ASKING FOR HELP, APPEAL TO PEOPLE’S SELF INTEREST, 

NEVER TO THEIR MERCY OR GRATITUDE 

If you need to turn to an ally for help, do not bother to remind him of your past assistance and good deeds. He 
will find a way to ignore you. Instead, uncover something in your request, or in your alliance with him , that 
will benefit him, and emphasize it out of all proportion. He will respond enthusiastically when he sees some¬ 
thing to be gained for himself 


X 


CONTENTS 




LAW 14 page 101 

POSE AS A FRIEND, WORK AS A SPY 

Knowing about your rival is critical. Use spies to gather valuable information that will keep you a step ahead. 
Better still: Play the spy yourself. In polite social encounters, learn to probe. Ask indirect questions to get people 
to reveal their weaknesses and intentions . There is no occasion that is not an opportunity for artful spying. 

LAW J 5 page 107 

CRUSH YOUR ENEMY TOTALLY 

All great leaders since Moses have known that a feared enemy must be crushed completely. (Sometimes they 
have learned this the hard way.) If one ember is left: alight, no matter how dimly it smolders, a fire will eventu¬ 
ally break out. More is lost through stopping halfway than through total annihilation: The enemy will recover, 
and will seek revenge. Crush him, not only in body but in spirit. 


LAW 16 page 115 

USE ABSENCE TO INCREASE RESPECT AND HONOR 
Too much circulation makes the price go down: The more you are seen and heard from, the more common you 
appear. If you are already established in a group, temporary withdrawal from it will make you more talked 
about, even more admired. You must learn when to leave. Create, value through scarcity. 


LAW 17 page 123 

KEEP OTHERS IN SUSPENDED TERROR: CULTIVATE AN AIR OF UNPREDICTABILITY 
Humans are creatures of habit with an insatiable need to see familiarity in other people's actions. Your pre¬ 
dictability gives them a sense of control. Turn the tables: Be deliberately unpredictable. Behavior that seems to 
have no consistency or purpose will keep them off-balance, and they will wear themselves out trying to explain 
your moves. Taken to an extreme, this strategy can intimidate and terrorize. 

LAW 18 page 130 

DO NOT BUILD FORTRESSES TO PROTECT YOURSELF—ISOLATION IS DANGEROUS 
The world is dangerous and enemies are everywhere—everyone has to protect themselves. A fortress seems the 
safest. But isolation exposes you to more dangers than it protects you from—it cuts you off from valuable in¬ 
formation, it makes you conspicuous and an easy target. Better to circulate among people, find allies, mingle. 
You are shielded from your enemies by the crowd. 


LAW 19 page 137 

KNOW WHO YOU'RE DEALING WITH—DO NOT OFFEND THE WRONG PERSON 
There are many different kinds of people in the world, and you can never assume that everyone will react to 
your strategies in the same way. Deceive or outmaneuver some people and they will spend the rest of their lives 
seeking revenge. They are wolves in lambs' clothing. Choose your victims and opponents carefully, then — 
never offend or deceive the wrong person. 


CONTENTS : xi 



LAW 20 page 145 
DO NOT COMMIT TO ANYONE 

It is the fool who always rushes to take sides . Bo not commit to any side or cause but yourself By maintaining 
your independence, you become the master of others—playing people against one another, making them pursue 
you. 


LAW 21 page 156 

PLAY A SUCKER TO CATCH A SUCKER—SEEM DUMBER THAN YOUR MARK 
No one likes feeling stupider than the next person. The trick, then, is to make your victims feel smart—and not 
just smart, but smarter than you are. Once convinced of this, they will never suspect that you may have ulte¬ 
rior motives. 


LAW 22 page 163 

USE THE SURRENDER TACTIC: TRANSFORM WEAKNESS INTO POWER 
When you am weaker, never fight for honor's sake; choose surrender instead. Surrender gives you time to re¬ 
cover, time to torment and irritate your conqueror, time to wait for his poiver to wane. Do not give him the sat¬ 
isfaction of fighting and defeating you — surrenderfirst. By turning the other cheek you infuriate and unsettle 
him. Make surrender a tool of power. 


LAW 23 page 171 
CONCENTRATE YOUR FORCES 

Conserve yourforces and energies by keeping them concentrated at their strongest point You gain more by find¬ 
ing a rich mine and mining it deeper, than by flitting from one shallcnv mine to another—-intensity defeats ex¬ 
tensity every time. When looking for sources of power to elevate you, find the one key patron, the fat cow who 
will give you milk for a long time to come. 


LAW 24 page 178 

PLAY THE PERFECT COURTIER 

The perfect courtier thrives in a world where everything revolves around power and political dexterity. He has 
mastered the art of indirection; he flatters, yields to superiors, and asserts power over others in the most oblique 
and graceful manner. Learn and apply the Urns of courtiership and there toill be no limit to how far you can 
rise in the court. 


LAW 25 page 19f 
RE-CREATE YOURSELF 

Do not accept the roles that society foists on you. Re-create yourself by forging a new identity, one that com¬ 
mands attention and never' bores the audience. Be the master of your own image rather than letting others de¬ 
fine it for you. Incorporate dramatic devices into your public gestures and actions—your power will be 
enhanced and your character will seem larger than life. 


LAW 26 page 200 
KEEP YOUR HANDS CLEAN 

You must seem a paragmi of civility and efficiency: Your hands are never soiled by mistakes and nasty deeds. 
Maintain such a spotless appearance by using others as scapegoats and cat's-paws to disguise your in¬ 
volvement 

XU CONTENTS 



LAW 27 page 215 

PLAY ON PEOPLE'S NEED TO BELIEVE TO CREATE A CULTLIKE FOLLOWING 
People have an overwhelming desire to believe in something. Become the focal point of such desire by offering 
them a cause, a nett* faith to follow. Keep your words vague but full of promise; emphasize enthusiasm over 
rationality and dear thinking. Give your new disciples rituals to perform, ask them to make sacrifices on your 
behalf In the absence of organized religion and grand causes, your new belief system will bring you untold 
power ,: 


LAW 28 page 227 

ENTER ACTION WITH BOLDNESS 

If you are unsure of a course of action, do not attempt it. Your doubts and hesitations will infect your execu¬ 
tion. Timidity is dangerous: Better to enter with boldness. Any mistakes you commit through audacity are eas¬ 
ily corrected with more audacity. Everyone admires the bold; no one honors the timid. 

LAW 29 page 236 

PLAN ALL THE WAY TO THE END 

The ending is everything. Plan all the way to it, taking into account all the possible consequences, obstacles, 
and twists of fortune that might reverse your hard work and give the glory to others. By planning to the end 
you will not be overwhelmed by circumstances and you will know when to stop . Gently guide fortune and help 
determine the future by thinking far ahead. 


LAW 30 page 245 

MAKE YOUR ACCOMPLISHMENTS SEEM EFFORTLESS 
Your actions must seem natural and executed with ease. All the toil and practice that go into them, and also 
all the clever tricks, must be concealed. When you act, act effortlessly, as if you could do much more. Avoid the 
temptation of revealing how hard you work—it only raises questions . Teach no one your tricks or they will be 
used against you. 


LAW 31 page 254 

CONTROL THE OPTIONS: GET OTHERS TO PLAY WITH THE CARDS YOU DEAL 
The best deceptions are the ones that seem to give the other person a choice: Your victims fed they aw in control 
but are actually your puppets. Give people options that come out in your favor whichever one they choose. Forte 
them to make choices between the lesser of two evils, both of which serve your purpose. Put them on the horns of 
a dilemma: They aw gored wherever they turn. 

LAW 32 page 263 
PLAY TO PEOPLE’S FANTASIES 

The truth is often avoided because it is ugly and unpleasant. Never appeal to truth and reality unless you aw 
prepared for the anger that comes from disenchantment. Life is so harsh and distressing that people who can 
manufacture romance or conjure up fantasy aw like oases in the desert: Everyoneflocks to them. There is great 
poxver in tapping into the fantasies of the masses. 


contents xiii 



LAW 33 page 271 

DISCOVER EACH MAN’S THUMBSCREW 

Everyone has a weakness, a gap in the castle wall. That weakness is usually an insecurity, an uncontrollable 
emotion or need; it can also be a small secret pleasure . Either way, once found, it is a thumbscrew you can turn 
to your advantage. 


LAW 34 page 282 

BE ROYAL IN YOUR OWN FASHION: ACT LIKE A KING TO BE TREATED LIKE ONE 
The way you carry yourself will often determine how you are treated: In the long run, appearing vulgar or com¬ 
mon will make people disrespect you. For a king respects himself and inspires the same sentiment in others. By 
acting regally and confident of your powers, you make yourself seem destined to wear a crown. 


LAW 35 page 291 

MASTER THE ART OF TIMING 

Never seem to be in a hurry—hurrying betrays a lack of control over yourself, and over time. Always seem pa¬ 
tient, as if you know that everything will come to you eventually. Become a detective of the right moment; sniff 
out the spirit of the times, the trends that will carry you to power. I^eam to stand back when the time is not yet 
ripe; and to strike fiercely when it has reached fruition. 

L AW 36 page 300 

DISDAIN THINGS YOU CANNOT HAVE: IGNORING THEM IS THE BEST REVENGE 
By acknowledging a petty problem you give it existence and credibility. The more attention you pay an enemy, 
the stronger you make him; and a small mistake is often made worse and more visible when you try to fix it. It 
is sometimes best to leave things alone. If them is something you want but cannot have, show contempt for it. 
The less interest you reveal, the mom superior you seem. 

LAW 3 7 page 309 

CREATE COMPELLING SPECTACLES 

Striking imagery and grand symbolic gestures create the aura of power—everyone responds to them. Stage spec¬ 
tacles for those around you, then, full of arresting visuals and radiant symbols that heighten your presence. 
Dazzled by appearances, no one will notice what you are really doing. 

LAW 38 page 317 

THINK AS YOU LIKE BUT BEHAVE LIKE OTHERS 
If you make a shoxv of going against the times, flaunting your unconventional ideas and unorthodox ways, 
people will think that you only want attention and that you look dawn upon them. They will find a way to 
punish you for making them feel inferior. It is far safer to blend in and nurture the common touch. Sham your 
originality only with tolerant friends and those who am sure to appreciate your uniqueness. 

LAW 39 page325 

STIR UP WATERS TO CATCH FISH 

Anger and emotion are strategically counterproductive. You must always stay calm and objective. But if you 
can make your enemies angry while staying calm yourself you gain a decided advantage. Pul your enemies 
off-balance: Find the chink in their vanity through which you can rattle them and you hold the strings. 


XIV 


CONTENTS 



LAW 40 page 333 
DESPISE THE FREE LUNCH 

What is offered forfree is dangerous—it usually involves either a trick or a hidden obligation . What has worth 
is worth paying for. By paying your own way you stay clear of gratitude, guilt , and deceit. It is also often wise 
to pay the full price—there is no cutting comers with excellence. Be lavish with your money and keep it circu¬ 
lating, for generosity is a sign and a magnet for power. 

L A W 41 page 34 7 

AVOID STEPPING INTO A GREAT MAN'S SHOES 
What happens first always appears better and more original than what comes after. If you succeed a great man 
or have a famous parent, you will have to accomplish double their achievements to outshine them. Do not get 
lost in their shadow, or stuck in a past not of your own making: Establish your own name and identity by 
changing course. Slay the overbearing father, disparage his legacy, and gain power by shining in your own 
way. 


LAW 42 page 358 

STRIKE THE SHEPHERD AND THE SHEEP WILL SCATTER 
Trouble can often be traced to a single strong individual—the stirrer, the arrogant underling, the poisoner of 
goodwill. If you allow such people room to operate, others will succumb to their influence. Do not wait for the 
troubles they cause to multiply, do not try to negotiate with them—they are irredeemable. Neutralize their in¬ 
fluence by isolating or banishing them. Strike at the source of the trouble and the sheep will scatter. 

LAW 43 page 367 

WORK ON THE HEARTS AND MINDS OF OTHERS 
Coercion creates a reaction that will eventually work against you. You must seduce others into wanting to 
move in your direction. A person you have seduced becomes your loyal pawn. And the way to seduce others is to 
operate on their individual psychologies and weaknesses. Soften up the resistant by working on their emotions, 
playing on what they hold dear and what they fear. Ignore the hearts and minds of others and they will grow to 
hate. you. 


LAW 44 page 376 

DISARM AND INFURIATE WITH THE MIRROR EFFECT 
The mirror reflects reality, but it is also the perfect tool for deception: When you mirror your enemies, doing ex¬ 
actly as they do, they cannot figure out your strategy. The Mirror Effect mocks and humiliates them, making 
them overreact. By holding up a mirror to their psyches, you seduce them with the illusion that you sham their 
values; by holding up a mirror to their actions, you teach them a lesson. Few can resist the power of the Mirror 
Effect. 


LAW 45 page 392 

PREACH THE NEED FOR CHANGE, BUT NEVER REFORM TOO MUCH AT ONCE 
Everyone understands the need for change in the abstract, but on the day-to-day level people am creatures of 
habit. Too much innovation is traumatic, and will lead to revolt. If you are new to a position of power, or an 
outsider trying to build a poiuer base, make a show of respecting the old, way of doing things. If change is nec¬ 
essary, make it feel like a gentle improvement on the past. 


XV 


CONTENTS 




LAW 46 page 400 
NEVER APPEAR TOO PERFECT 

Appearing better than others is always dangerous* but most dangerous of all is to appear to have no faults or 
weaknesses. Envy creates silent enemies. It is smart to occasionally display defects, and admit to harmless 
vices, in order to deflect envy and appear more human and approachable . Only gods and the dead can seem 
perfect with impunity. 

LAW 47 page 410 

DO NOT GO PAST THE MARK YOU AIMED FOR; 

IN VICTORY, LEARN WHEN TO STOP 

The moment of victory is often the moment of greatest peril . In the heat of victory, arrogance and overconfi¬ 
dence can push you past the goal you had aimed for, and by going too far, you make more enemies than you 
defeat. Do not allow success to go to your head. There is no substitute for strategy and careful planning. Set a 
goal, and when you reach it, stop. 

LAW 48 page. 419 
ASSUME FORMLESSNESS 

By taking a shape, by having a visible plan, you open yourself to attack . Instead of taking a form for your 
enemy to grasp, keep yourself adaptable and on the move. Accept the fact that nothing is certain and no law is 
fixed . The best way to protect yourself is to be as fluid and formless as water; never bet on stability or lasting 
order. Everything changes. 

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY page. 431 
INDEX page 433 


xvi \ CONTENTS 



PREFACE 


The feeling of having no power over people and events is generally un¬ 
bearable to us—when we feel helpless we feel miserable. No one wants less 
power; everyone wants more. In the world today, however, it is dangerous 
to seem too power hungry, to be overt with your power moves. We have 
to seem fair and decent. So we need to be subtle—congenial yet cunning, 
democratic yet devious. 

This game of constant duplicity most resembles the power dynamic 
that existed in the scheming world of the old aristocratic court. Throughout 
history, a court has always formed itself around the person in power—king, 
queen, emperor, leader. The courtiers who filled this court were in an espe¬ 
cially delicate position: They had to serve their masters, but if they seemed 
to fawn, if they curried favor too obviously, the other courtiers around 
them would notice and would act against them. Attempts to win the mas¬ 
ter’s favor, then, had to be subtle. And even skilled courtiers capable of 
such subtlety still had to protect themselves from their fellow courtiers, 
who at all moments were scheming to push them aside. 

Meanwhile the court was supposed to represent the height of civiliza¬ 
tion and refinement. Violent or overt power moves were frowned upon; 
courtiers would work silendy and secretly against any among them who 
used force. This was the courtier’s dilemma: While appearing the very 
paragon of elegance, they had to outwit and thwart their own opponents in 
the subtlest of ways. The successful courtier learned over time to make all 
of his moves indirect; if he stabbed an opponent in the back, it was with a 
velvet glove on his hand and the sweetest of smiles on his face. Instead of 
using coercion or outright treachery, the perfect courder got his way 
through seduction, charm, deception, and subtie strategy, always planning 
several moves ahead. Life in the court was a never-ending game that re¬ 
quired constant vigilance and tactical thinking. It was civilized war. 

Today we face a peculiarly similar paradox to that of the courtier: 
Everything must appear civilized, decent, democratic, and fair. But if we 
play by those rules too strictly, if we take them too literally, we are crushed 
by those around us who are not so foolish. As the great Renaissance diplo¬ 
mat and courtier Niccolo Machiavelli wrote, “Any man who tries to be 
good all the time is bound to come to ruin among the great number who 
are not good.” The court imagined itself the pinnacle of refinement, but un- 



Courts are, unquestion¬ 
ably, (he seats of polite¬ 
ness and good 
breeding; were they not 
so, they would he the 
seats of slaughter and 
desolation, those who 
now smile upon and 
embrace, would affront 
and stab, each other, 
if manners did not 
interpose .... 

Lord Chester!-teld, 
1694-1773 


There is nothing very 
odd about lambs 
disliking birds of prey, 
but this is no reason for 
holding it against large 
birds of prey that they 
carry off lambs. And 
when the lambs whis¬ 
per among themselves, 
“These birds of prey 
are evil, and does this 
not give us a right to 
say that whatever is the 
opposite of a bird of 
prey must be good?" 
there is nothing intrin¬ 
sically wrong with such 
an argument-—though 
the birds of prey will 
look somewhat quizzi¬ 
cally and say, “We have 
nothing against these 
good hunhs; in fuel, we 
love them; nothing 
tastes better than a 
tender lamb ." 

Friedrich Nietzsche, 
1844-1900 


demeath its glittering surface a cauldron of dark emotions—greed, envy, 
lust, hatred—boiled and simmered. Our world today similarly imagines it¬ 
self the pinnacle of fairness, yet the same ugly emotions still stir within us, 
as they have forever. The game is the same. Outwardly, you must seem to 
respect the niceties, but inwardly, unless you are a fool, you learn quickly 
to be prudent, and to do as Napoleon advised: Place your iron hand inside 
a velvet glove. If, like the courtier of times gone by, you can master the arts 
of indirection, learning to seduce, charm, deceive, and subtly outmaneuver 
your opponents, you will attain the heights of power. You will be able to 
make people bend to your will without their realizing what you have done. 
And if they do not realize what you have done, they will neither resent nor 
resist you. 

To some people the notion of consciously playing power games—no mat¬ 
ter how indirect—seems evil, asocial, a relic of the past. They believe they 
can opt out of the game by behaving in ways that have nothing to do with 
power. You must beware of such people, for while they express such opin¬ 
ions outwardly, they are often among the most adept players at power. 
They utilize strategies that cleverly disguise the nature of the manipulation 
involved. These types, for example, will often display their weakness and 
lack of power as a kind of moral virtue. But true poweriessness, without 
any motive of self-interest, would not publicize its weakness to gain sympa¬ 
thy or respect. Making a show of one’s weakness is actually a very effective 
strategy, subtle and deceptive, in the game of power (see Law 22, the Sur¬ 
render Tactic). 

Another strategy of the supposed nonplayer is to demand equality in 
every area of life. Everyone must be treated alike, whatever their status and 
strength. But if, to avoid the taint of power, you attempt to treat everyone 
equally and fairly, you will confront die problem that some people do cer¬ 
tain things better than others. Treating everyone equally means ignoring 
their differences, elevating the less skillful and suppressing those who 
excel. Again, many of those who behave this way are actually deploying 
another power strategy, redistributing people’s rewards in a way that they 
determine. 

Yet another way of avoiding the game would be perfect honesty and 
straightforwardness, since one of the main techniques of those who seek 
power is deceit and secrecy. But being perfectly honest will inevitably hurt 
and insult a great many people, some of whom will choose to injure you in 
return. No one will see your honest statement as completely objective and 
free of some personal motivation. And they will be right: In truth, the use 
of honesty is indeed a power strategy, intended to convince people of one’s 
noble, good hearted, selfless character. It is a form of persuasion, even a 
subde form of coercion. 

Finally, those who claim to be nonplayers may affect an air of naivete, 
to protect them from the accusation that they are after power. Beware 
again, however, for the appearance of naivete can be an effective means of 


xoiu ; PREFACE 



deceit (see Law 21, Seem Dumber Than Your Mark). And even genuine 
naivete is not free of the snares of power. Children may be naive in many 
ways, but they often act from an elemental need to gain control over those 
around them. Children suffer greatly from feeling powerless in the adult 
world, and they use any means available to get their way. Genuinely inno¬ 
cent people may still be playing for power, and are often horribly effective 
at the game, since they are not hindered by reflection. Once again, those 
who make a show or display of innocence are the least innocent of all. 

You can recognize these supposed nonplayers by the way they flaunt 
their moral qualities, their piety, their exquisite sense of justice. But since 
all of us hunger for power, and almost all of our actions are aimed at gain¬ 
ing it, the nonplayers are merely throwing dust in our eyes, distracting us 
from their power plays with their air of moral superiority. If you observe 
them closely, you will see in fact that they are often the ones most skillful at 
indirect manipulation, even if some of them practice it unconsciously. And 
they greatly resent any publicizing of the tactics they use every day. 

If the world is like a giant scheming court and we are trapped inside it, 
there is no use in trying to opt out of the game. That will only render you 
powerless, and powerlessness will make you miserable. Instead of strug¬ 
gling against the inevitable, instead of arguing and whining and feeling 
guilty, it is far better to excel at power. In fact, the better you are at dealing 
with power, the better friend, lover, husband, wife, and person you be¬ 
come. By following the route of the perfect courtier {see Law 24) you learn 
to make others feel better about themselves, becoming a source of pleasure 
to them. They will grow dependent on your abilities and desirous of your 
presence. By mastering the 48 Jaws in this book, you spare others the pain 
that comes from bungling with power—by playing with fire without know¬ 
ing its properties. If the game of power is inescapable, better to be an artist 
than a denier or a bungler. 

Learning the game of power requires a certain way of looking at the world, 
a shifting of perspective. It takes effort and years of practice, for much of 
the game may not come naturally. Certain basic skills are required, and 
once you master these skills you will be able to apply the laws of power 
more easily. 

The most important of these skills, and power’s crucial foundation, is 
the ability to master your emotions. An emotional response to a situation is 
the single greatest barrier to power, a mistake that will cost you a lot more 
than any temporary satisfaction you might gain by expressing your feel¬ 
ings. Emotions cloud reason, and if you cannot see the situation clearly, 
you cannot prepare for and respond to it with any degree of control. 

Anger is the most destructive of emotional responses, for it clouds 
your vision the most. It also has a ripple effect that invariably makes situa¬ 
tions less controllable and heightens your enemy’s resolve. If you are try¬ 
ing to destroy an enemy who has hurt you, far better to keep him off-guard 
by feigning friendliness than showing your anger. 


The only means to gain 
one's ends with people 
are force and cunning. 
Love also . they say; bat 
that is to wait for 
sunshine, and life needs 
every moment. 

.'Johann von Gofthi-:, 
1749-1832 


The arrow shot by die 
archer may or may not 
kill a single person. But 
stratagems devised by a 
wise man can kill even 
babes in the womb. 
Kautilya. 

Indian philosopher. 

THIRD CENTURY !}.C. 


1 


PREFACE 


xac 



I thought to myself 
with what means, with 
what deceptions, with 
how many varied arts , 
with what industry a 
man sharpens his wits 
to deceive another, 
and through these 
variations the world is 
made more beautiful. 

F R A NO ES CO V ETTO RI, 
CONTEMPORARY AND 
FRIEND OF 

Maciiiavelli, 
EARLY SIXTEENTH 
CENTORY 


There are no princi¬ 
ples; there are only 
events. There is no 
good and bad, there are 
on ly circumstances. 

The superior man 
espouses events and 
circumstances in order 
to guide them. If there 
were principles and 
fixed la ws, nations 
would not change them 
as we change our shirts 
and a man can not be 
expected to be wiser 
than an entire nation. 

Honore df. Balzac, 
1799-1850 


XX I PREFACE 


Love and affection are also potentially destructive, in that they blind 
you to the often self-serving interests of those whom you least suspect of 
playing a power game. You cannot repress anger or love, or avoid feeling 
them, and you should not try. But you should be careful about how you ex¬ 
press them, and most important, they should never influence your plans 
and strategies in any way. 

Related to mastering your emotions is the ability to distance yourself 
from the present moment and think objectively about the past and future. 
Like Janus, the double-faced Roman deity and guardian of all gates and 
doorways, you must be able to look in both directions at once, the better to 
handle danger from wherever it comes. Such is the face you must create for 
yourself-one face looking continuously to the future and the other to the 
past. 

For the future, the motto is, “No days unalert.” Nothing should catch 
you by surprise because you are constantly imagining problems before 
they arise. Instead of spending your time dreaming of your plan’s happy 
ending, you must work on calculating every possible permutation and pit- 
fall that might emerge in it. The further you see, the more steps ahead you 
plan, the more powerful you become. 

The other face of Janus looks constantly to the past—though not to re¬ 
member past hurts or bear grudges. That would only curb your power. 
Half of the game is learning how to forget those events in the past that eat 
away at you and cloud your reason. The real purpose of the backward- 
glancing eye is to educate yourself constantly—you look at the past to learn 
from those who came before you. (The many historical examples in this 
book will greatly help that process.) Then, having looked to the past, you 
look closer at hand, to your own actions and those of your friends. This is 
the most vital school you can learn from, because it comes from personal 
experience. 

You begin by examining the mistakes you have made in the past, the 
ones that have most grievously held you back. You analyze them in terms 
of the 48 laws of power, and you extract from them a lesson and an oath : 
“I shall never repeat such a mistake; I shall never fall into such a trap 
again.” If you can evaluate and observe yourself in this way, you can learn 
to break the patterns of the past—an immensely valuable skill. 

Power requires the ability to play with appearances. To this end you 
must leam to wear many masks and keep a bag full of deceptive tricks. De¬ 
ception and masquerade should not be seen as ugly or immoral. All human 
interaction requires deception on many levels, and in some ways what sep¬ 
arates humans from animals is our ability to lie and deceive. In Greek 
myths, in India’s Mahabharata cycle, in the Middle Eastern epic of Gilga- 
mesh, it is the privilege of the gods to use deceptive arts; a great man, 
Odysseus for instance, was judged by his ability to rival the craftiness of the 
gods, stealing some of their divine power by matching them in wits and de¬ 
ception. Deception is a developed art of civilization and the most potent 
weapon in the game of power. 



You cannot succeed at deception unless you take a somewhat dis¬ 
tanced approach to yourself—unless you can be many different people, 
wearing the mask that the day and the moment require. With such a flexi¬ 
ble approach to all appearances, including your own, you lose a lot of the 
inward heaviness that holds people down. Make your face as malleable as 
the actor's, work to conceal your intentions from others, practice luring 
people into traps. Playing with appearances and mastering arts of decep¬ 
tion are among the aesthetic pleasures of life. They are also key compo¬ 
nents in the acquisition of power. 

If deception is the most potent weapon in your arsenal, then patience 
in all things is your crucial shield. Patience will protect you from making 
moronic blunders. Like mastering your emotions, patience is a skill—it 
does not come naturally. But nothing about power is natural; power is 
more godlike than anything in the natural world. And patience is the 
supreme virtue of the gods, who have nothing but time. Everything good 
will happen—the grass will grow again, if you give it time and see several 
steps into the future. Impatience, on the other hand, only makes you look 
weak. It is a principal impediment to power. 

Power is essentially amoral and one of the most important skills to ac¬ 
quire is the ability to see circumstances rather than good or evil. Power is a 
game—this cannot be repeated too often—and in games you do not judge 
your opponents by their intentions but by the effect of their actions. You 
measure their strategy 7 and their power by what you can see and feel. How 
often are someone’s intentions made the issue only to cloud and deceive! 
What does it matter if another player, your friend or rival, intended good 
things and had only your interests at heart, if the effects of his action lead to 
so much min and confusion? It is only natural for people to cover up their 
actions with all kinds of justifications, always assuming that they have acted 
out of goodness. You must learn to inwardly laugh each time you hear this 
and never get caught up in gauging someone’s intentions and actions 
through a set of moral judgments that are really an excuse for the accumu¬ 
lation of power. 

It is a game. Your opponent sits opposite you. Both of you behave as 
gentlemen or ladies, observing the rules of the game and taking nothing 
personally. You play with a strategy and you observe your opponent’s 
moves with as much calmness as you can muster. In the end, you will ap¬ 
preciate the politeness of those you are playing with more than their good 
and sweet intentions. Train your eye to follow the results of their moves, 
the outward circumstances, and do not be distracted by anything else. 

Half of your mastery of power comes from what you do not do, what 
you do not allow yourself to get dragged into. For this skill you must learn 
to judge all filings by what they cost you. As Nietzsche wrote, “The value of 
a thing sometimes lies not in what one attains with it, but in what one pays 
for it—what it costs us,” Perhaps you will attain your goal, and a worthy goal^ 
at that, but at what price? Apply this standard to everything, including 
whether to collaborate with other people or come to their aid. In the end, 



life is short, opportunities are few, and you have only so much energy to 
draw on. And in this sense time is as important a consideration as any 
other. Never waste valuable time, or mental peace of mind, on the affairs of 
others—that is too high a price to pay. 

Power is a social game. To learn and master it, you must develop the 
ability to study and under stand people. As the great seventeenth-century 
thinker and courtier Baltasar Gracian wrote: “Many people spend time 
studying the properties of animals or herbs; how much more important it 
would be to study those of people, with whom we must live or die!” To be a 
master player you must also be a master psychologist. You must recognize 
motivations and see through the cloud of dust with which people surround 
their actions. An understanding of people’s hidden motives is the single 
greatest piece of knowledge you can have in acquiring power. It opens up 
endless possibilities of deception, seduction, and manipulation. 

People are of infinite complexity and you can spend a lifetime watch¬ 
ing them without ever hilly understanding them. So it is all the more im¬ 
portant, then, to begin your education now. In doing so you must also keep 
f one principle in mind: Never discriminate as to whom you study and 
a whom you trust. Never trust anyone completely and study everyone, in- 
| eluding friends and loved ones. 

Finally, you must learn always to take the indirect route to power. Dis¬ 
guise your cunning. Like a billiard ball that caroms several times before it 
hits its target, your moves must be planned and developed in the least ob¬ 
vious way. By training yourself to be indirect, you can thrive in the modem 
court, appearing the paragon of decency while being the consummate ma¬ 
nipulator. 

Consider The 48 Laws of Power a kind of handbook on the arts of indirec¬ 
tion. The laws are based on the writings of men and women who have 
studied and mastered the game of power. These writings span a period of 
more than three thousand years and were created in civilizations as dis¬ 
parate as ancient China and Renaissance Italy; yet they share common 
threads and themes, together hinting at an essence of power that has yet to 
be fully articulated. The 48 laws of power are the distillation of this accu¬ 
mulated wisdom, gathered from the writings of the most illustrious strate¬ 
gists (Sun-tzu, Clausewitz), statesmen (Bismarck, Talleyrand), courtiers 
(Castiglione, Gracian), seducers (Ninon de Lenclos, Casanova), and con 
artists (“Yellow Kid” Weil) in history. 

The laws have a simple premise: Certain actions almost always in¬ 
crease one’s power (the observance of the law), while others decrease it 
and even min us (the transgression of the law). These transgressions and 
observances are illustrated by historical examples. The laws are timeless 
and definitive. 

The 48 Laws of Power can be used in several ways. By reading the book 
straight through you can learn about power in general. Although several of 
the laws may seem not to pertain directly to your life, in time you will 

xxii. I preface 



probably find that all of them have some application, and that in fact they 
are interrelated, By getting an overview of the entire subject you will best 
be able to evaluate your own past actions and gain a greater degree of con¬ 
trol over your immediate affairs. A thorough reading of the book will in¬ 
spire thinking and reevaluation long after you finish it 

The book has also been designed for browsing and for examining the 
law that seems at that particular moment most pertinent to you. Say you 
are experiencing problems with a superior and cannot understand why 
your efforts have not lead to more gratitude or a promotion. Several laws 
specifically address the master-underling relationship, and you are almost 
certainly transgressing one of them. By browsing the initial paragraphs for 
the 48 laws in the table of contents, you can identify the pertinent law. 

Finally, the book can be browsed through and picked apart for enter¬ 
tainment, for an enjoyable ride through the foibles and great deeds of our 
predecessors in power. A warning, however, to those who use the book for 
this purpose: It might be better to turn back. Power is endlessly seductive 
and deceptive in its own way. It is a labyrinth—your mind becomes con¬ 
sumed with solving its infinite problems, and you soon realize how pleas¬ 
antly lost you have become. In other words, it becomes most amusing by 
taking it seriously. Do not be frivolous with such a critical matter The gods 
of power frown on the frivolous; they give ultimate satisfaction only to 
those who study and reflect, and punish those who skim the surfaces look¬ 
ing for a good time. 

Any man who tries to he good all the time is bound to come to ruin 
among the great number who are not good. Hence a prince who wants 
to keep his authority must learn how not to be good, and me that 
knowledge , or refrain from using it, as necessity requires. 


The Prince, Niccolb Mackiamlli, 7469-1527 




LAW 


1 

NEVER OUTSHINE 
THE MASTER 

JUDGMENT 

Always make those above you feel comfortably superior. 
In your desire to please and impress them, do not go too 
far in displaying your talents or you might accomplish 
the opposite—inspire fear and insecurity . Make your 
masters appear more brilliant than they are and you will 
attain the heights of power. 



TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

Nicolas Fouquet, Louis XIV’s finance minister in the first years of his reign, 
was a generous man who loved lavish parties, pretty women, and poetry. 
He also loved money, for he led an extravagant lifestyle. Fouquet was 
clever and very much indispensable to the king, so when the prime minis¬ 
ter, Jules Mazarin, died, in 1661, the finance minister expected to be 
named the successor. Instead, the king decided to abolish the position. This 
and other signs made Fouquet suspect that he was falling out of favor, and 
so he decided to ingratiate himself with the king by staging the most spec¬ 
tacular party the world had ever seen. The party’s ostensible purpose 
would be to commemorate the completion of Fouquet’s chateau, Vaux-le- 
Vicomte, but its real function was to pay tribute to the king, the guest of 
honor. 

The most brilliant nobility of Europe and some of the greatest minds 
of the time—La Fontaine, La Rochefoucauld, Madame de Sevigne— 
attended the party. Moliere wrote a play for the occasion, in which he 
himself was to perform at the evening’s conclusion. The party began with a 
lavish seven-course dinner, featuring foods from the Orient never be¬ 
fore tasted in France, as well as new dishes created especially for the night. 
The meal was accompanied with music commissioned by Fouquet to 
honor the king. 

After dinner there was a promenade through the chateau’s gardens. 
The grounds and fountains of Vaux-le-Vicomte were to be the inspiration 
for Versailles. 

Fouquet personally accompanied the young king through the geomet¬ 
rically aligned arrangements of shrubbery and flower beds. Arriving at the 
gardens’ canals, they witnessed a fireworks display, which was followed by 
the performance of Moliere’s play. The party ran well into the night and 
everyone agreed it was the most amazing affair they had ever attended. 

The next day, Fouquet was arrested by the king’s head musketeer, 
D’Artagnan. Three months later he went on trial for stealing from the 
country’s treasury. (Actually, most of the stealing he was accused of he had 
done on the king’s behalf and with the king’s permission.) Fouquet was 
found guilty and sent to the most isolated prison in France, high in the 
Pyrenees Mountains, where he spent the last twenty years of his life in soli¬ 
tary confinement. 

Interpretation 

Louis XIV, the Sun King, was a proud and arrogant man who wanted to be 
the center of attention at all times; he could not countenance being out¬ 
done in lavishness by anyone, and certainly not his finance minister. To 
succeed Fouquet, Louis chose Jean-Baptiste Colbert, a man famous for his 
parsimony and for giving the dullest parties in Paris. Colbert made sure 
that any money liberated from the treasury went straight into Louis’s 
hands. With the money, Louis built a palace even more magnificent than 
Fouquet’s—the glorious palace of Versailles. He used the same architects, 



decorators, and garden designer. And at Versailles, Louis hosted parties 
even more extravagant than the one that cost Fouquet his freedom. 

Let us examine the situation. The evening of the party, as Fouquet pre¬ 
sented spectacle on spectacle to Louis, each more magnificent than the one 
before, he imagined the affair as demonstrating his loyalty and devotion to 
the king. Not only did he think the party would put him back in the king’s 
favor, he thought it would show his good taste, his connections, and his 
popularity, making him indispensable to the king and demonstrating that 
he would make an excellent prime minister. Instead, however, each new 
spectacle, each appreciative smile bestowed by the guests on Fouquet, 
made it seem to Louis that his own friends and subjects were more 
charmed by the finance minister than by the king himself, and that Fouquet 
was actually flaunting his wealth and power Rather than flattering Louis 
XIV, Fouquet’s elaborate party offended the king’s vanity. Louis would not 
admit this to anyone, of course—instead, he found a convenient excuse to 
rid himself of a man who had inadvertently made him feel insecure. 

Such is the fate, in some form or other, of all those who unbalance the 
master’s sense of self, poke holes in his vanity, or make him doubt his pre¬ 
eminence. 

When the evening began, Fouquet was at the top of the world. 

By the time it had ended, he was at the bottom . 

Voltaire, 1694-J 778 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

In the early 1600s, the Italian astronomer and mathematician Galileo 
found himself in a precarious position. He depended on the generosity of 
great rulers to support his research, and so, like all Renaissance scientists, 
he would sometimes make gifts of his inventions and discoveries to the 
leading patrons of the time. Once, for instance, he presented a military 
compass he had invented to the Duke of Gonzaga. Then he dedicated a 
book explaining the use of the compass to the Medicis. Both rulers were 
grateful, and through them Galileo was able to find more students to teach. 
No matter how great the discovery, however, his patrons usually paid him 
with gifts, not cash. This made for a life of constant insecurity and depen¬ 
dence. There must be an easier way, he thought 

Galileo hit on a new strategy in 1610, when he discovered the moons 
of Jupiter. Instead of dividing the discovery among his patrons—giving 
one the telescope he had used, dedicating a book to another, and so on—as 
he had done in the past, he decided to focus exclusively on the Medicis. He 
chose the Medicis for one reason: Shortly after Cosimo I had established 
the Medici dynasty, in 1540, he had made Jupiter, the mightiest of the 
gods, the Medici symbol—a symbol of a power that went beyond politics 
and banking, one linked to andent Rome and its divinities. 

Galileo turned his discovery of Jupiter’s moons into a cosmic event 



honoring the Medicis’ greatness. Shortly after the discovery, he announced 
that “the bright stars [the moons of Jupiter] offered themselves in the heav¬ 
ens” to his telescope at the same time as Cosimo IFs enthronement. He 
said that the number of the moons—four—harmonized with the number of 
the Medicis (Cosimo II had three brothers) and that the moons orbited 
Jupiter as these four sons revolved around Cosimo I, the dynasty’s founder. 
More than coincidence, this showed that the heavens themselves reflected 
the ascendancy of the Medici family After he dedicated the discovery to 
the Medicis, Galileo commissioned an emblem representing Jupiter sitting 
on a cloud with the four stars circling about him, and presented this to 
Cosimo II as a symbol of his link to the stars. 

In 1610 Cosimo II made Galileo his official court philosopher and 
mathematician, with a full salary. For a scientist this was the coup of a life¬ 
time. The days of begging for patronage were over. 

Interpretation 

In one stroke, Galileo gained more with his new strategy than he had in 
years of begging. The reason is simple: All masters want to appear more 
brilliant than other people. 

They do not care about science or empirical truth or the latest inven¬ 
tion; they care about their name and their glory. Galileo gave the Medicis 
infinitely more glory by linking then name with cosmic forces than he had 
by making them the patr ons of some new scientific gadget or discovery 

Scientists are not spared the vagaries of court life and patronage. They 
too must serve masters who hold the purse strings. And their great intellec¬ 
tual powers can make the master feel insecure, as if he were only there to 
supply the funds—an ugly, ignoble job. The producer of a great work 
wants to feel he is more than just the provider of the financing. He wants to 
appeal- creative and powerful, and also more important than the work pro¬ 
duced in his name. Instead of insecurity you must give him glory. Galileo 
did not challenge the intellectual authority of the Medicis with his discov¬ 
ery, or make them feel inferior in any way; by literally aligning them with 
the stars, he made them shine brilliantly among the courts of Italy He did 
not outshine the master, he made the master outshine all others. 


KEYS TO POWER 

Everyone has insecurities. When you show yourself in the world and dis¬ 
play your talents, you naturally stir up all kinds of resentment, envy, and 
other manifestations of insecurity. This is to be expected. You cannot spend 
your life worrying about the petty feelings of others. With those above you, 
however, you must take a different approach: When it comes to power, 
outshining the master is perhaps the worst mistake of all. 

Do not fool yourself into thinking that life has changed much since the 
days of Louis XIV and the Medicis. Those who attain high standing in life 
are like kings and queens: They want to feel secure in their positions, and 



superior to those around them in intelligence, wit, and charm. It is a deadly 
but common misperception to believe that by displaying and vaunting 
your gifts and talents, you are winning the master’s affection. He may feign 
appreciation, but at his first opportunity he will replace you with someone 
less intelligent, less attractive, less threatening, just as Louis XIV replaced 
the sparkling Fouquet with the bland Colbert. And as with Louis, he will 
not admit the truth, but will find an excuse to rid himself of your presence. 

This Law involves two rules that you must realize. First, you can inad¬ 
vertently outshine a master simply by being yourself. There are masters 
who are more insecure than others, monstrously insecure; you may natu¬ 
rally outshine them by your charm and grace. 

No one had more natural talents than Astorre Manfredi, prince of 
Faenza. The most handsome of all the young princes of Italy, he captivated 
his subjects with his generosity and open spirit. 

In the year 1500, Cesare Borgia laid siege to Faenza. When the city 
surrendered, the citizens expected the worst from the cruel Borgia, who, 
however, decided to spare the town: He simply occupied its fortress, exe¬ 
cuted none of its citizens, and allowed Prince Manfredi, eighteen at the 
time, to remain with his court, in complete freedom. 

A few weeks later, though, soldiers hauled Astorre Manfredi away to a 
Roman prison. A year after that, his body was fished out of the River 
Tiber, a stone tied around his neck. Borgia justified the horrible deed with 
some sort of trumped-up charge of treason and conspiracy, but the real 
problem was that he was notoriously vain and insecure. The young man 
was outshining him without even trying. Given Manfredfs natural talents, 
the prince’s mere presence made Borgia seem less attractive and charis¬ 
matic. The lesson is simple: If you cannot help being charming and supe¬ 
rior, you must learn to avoid such monsters of vanity. Either that, or find a 
way to mute your good qualities when in the company of a Cesare Borgia. 

Second, never imagine that because the master loves you, you can do 
anything you want. Entire books could be written about favorites who fell 
out of favor by taking their status for granted, for daring to outshine. In 
late-sixteenth-century Japan, the favorite of Emperor Hideyoshi was a man 
called Sen no Rikyu. The premier artist of die tea ceremony, which had be¬ 
come an obsession with the nobility, he was one of Hideyoshi’s most 
trusted advisers, had his own apartment in the palace, and was honored 
throughout Japan. Yet in 1591, Hideyoshi had him arrested and sentenced 
to death. Rikyu took his own life, instead. The cause for his sudden change 
of fortune was discovered later: It seems that Rikyu, former peasant and 
later court favorite, had had a wooden statue made of himself wearing san¬ 
dals (a sign of nobility) and posing loftily. He had had this statue placed in 
the most important temple inside the palace gates, in clear sight of the roy¬ 
alty who often would pass by. To Hideyoshi this signified that Rikyu had 
no sense of limits. Presuming that he had the same rights as those of the 
highest nobility, he had forgotten that his position depended on the em¬ 
peror, and had come to believe that he had earned it on his own. This was 



an unforgivable miscalculation of his own importance and he paid for it 
with his life. Remember the following: Never take your position for 
granted and never let any favors you receive go to your head. 

Knowing the dangers of outshining your master, you can turn this Law 
to your advantage. First you must flatter and puff up your master. Overt 
flattery can be effective but has its limits; it is too direct and obvious, and 
looks bad to other courtiers. Discreet flattery is much more powerful. If 
you are more intelligent than your master, for example, seem the opposite: 
Make him appear more intelligent than you. Act naive. Make it seem that 
you need his expertise. Commit harmless mistakes that will not hurt you in 
the long run but will give you the chance to ask for his help. Masters adore 
such requests. A master who cannot bestow on you the gifts of his experi¬ 
ence may direct rancor and ill will at you instead. 

If your ideas are more creative than your master’s, ascribe them to 
him, in as public a manner as possible. Make it clear that your advice is 
merely an echo of his advice. 

If you surpass your master in wit, it is okay to play the role of the court 
jester, but do not make him appear cold and surly by comparison. Tone 
down your humor if necessary, and find ways to make him seem the dis¬ 
penser of amusement and good cheer. If you are naturally more sociable 
and generous than your master, be careful not to be the cloud that blocks 
his radiance from others. He must appear as the sun around which every¬ 
one revolves, radiating power and brilliance, the center of attention. If you 
are thrust into the position of entertaining him, a display of your limited 
means may win you his sympathy. Any attempt to impress him with your 
grace and generosity can prove fatal: Learn from Fouquet or pay the price. 

In all of these cases it is not a weakness to disguise your strengths if 
in the end they lead to power. By letting others outshine you, you remain 
in control, instead of being a victim of their insecurity. This will all come in 
handy the day you decide to rise above your inferior status. If, like Galileo, 
you can make your master shine even more in the eyes of others, then you 
are a godsend and you will be instandy promoted. 


Image: 

The Stars in the 
Sky. There can be only 
one sun at a time. Never 
obscure the sunlight, or 
rival the sun’s brilliance; 
rather, fade into the sky and 
find ways to heighten 
the master star’s 
intensity. 



Authority: Avoid outshining the master. AH superiority is odious, but the 
superiority of a subject over his prince is not only stupid, it is fatal. This is a 
lesson that the stars in the sky teach us—they may be related to the sun, 
and just as brilliant, but they never appear in her company. (Baltasar 
G racian, 1601-IG58) 


REVERSAL 

You cannot worry about upsetting every person you come across, but you 
must be selectively cruel. If your superior is a falling star, there is nothing 
to fear from outshining him. Do not be merciful—your master had no such 
scruples in his own cold-blooded climb to the top. Gauge his strength. If he 
is weak, discreetly hasten his downfall: Outdo, outcharm, outsmart him at 
key moments. If he is very weak and ready to fall, let nature take its course. 
Do not risk outshining a feeble superior—it might appear cruel or spiteful. 
But if your master is firm in his position, yet you know yourself to be the 
more capable, bide your time and be patient. It is the natural course of 
things that power eventually fades and weakens. Your master will fall 
someday, and if you play it right, you will outlive and someday outshine 
him. 



LAW 


2 

NEVER PUT TOO MUCH 
TRUST IN FRIENDS, LEARN 
HOW TO USE ENEMIES 

JUDGMENT 

Be wary of friends—they will betray you more quickly, for 
they are easily aroused to envy. They also become spoiled 
and tyrannical. But hire a former enemy and he will be 
more loyal than a friend , because he has more to prove. 
In fact, you have more to fearfrom friends than from en¬ 
emies. If you have no enemies , find a way to make them. 



TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

In the mid-ninth century A.D., a young man named Michael III assumed 
the throne of the Byzantine Empire. His mother, the Empress Theodora, 
had been banished to a nunnery, and her lover, Theoctistus, had been mur¬ 
dered; at the head of the conspiracy to depose Theodora and enthrone 
Michael had been Michael’s uncle, Bardas, a man of intelligence and ambi¬ 
tion. Michael was now a young, inexperienced ruler, surrounded by in¬ 
triguers, murderers, and profligates. In this time of peril he needed 
someone he could trust as his councillor, and his thoughts turned to Basil- 
ius, his best friend. Basilius had no experience whatsoever in government 
and politics—in fact, he was the head of the royal stables—but he had 
proven his love and gratitude time and again. 

They had met a few years before, when Michael had been visiting the 
stables just as a wild horse got loose. Basilius, a young groom from peasant 
Macedonian stock, had saved Michael’s life. The groom’s strength and 
courage had impressed Michael, who immediately raised Basilius from the 
obscurity of being a horse trainer to the position of head of the stables. He 
loaded his friend with gifts and favors and they became inseparable. Basil¬ 
ius was sent to the finest school in Byzantium, and the crude peasant be¬ 
came a cultured and sophisticated courtier. 

Now Michael was emperor, and in need of someone loyal. Who could 
he better trust with the post of chamberlain and chief councillor than a 
young man who owed him everything? 

Basilius could be trained for the job and Michael loved him like a 
brother. Ignoring the advice of those who recommended the much more 
qualified Bardas, Michael chose his friend. 

Basilius learned well and was soon advising the emperor on all matters 
of state. The only problem seemed to be money—Basilius never had 
enough. Exposure to the splendor of Byzantine court life made him avari¬ 
cious for the perks of power, Michael doubled, then tripled his salary, en¬ 
nobled him, and married him off to his own mistress, Eudoxia Ingerina. 
Keeping such a trusted friend and adviser satisfied was worth any price. 
But more trouble was to come. Bardas was now head of the army, and 
Basilius convinced Michael that the man was hopelessly ambitious. Under 
the illusion that he could control his nephew, Bardas had conspired to put 
him on the throne, and he could conspire again, this time to get rid of 
Michael and assume the crown himself. Basilius poured poison into 
Michael’s ear until the emperor agreed to have his uncle murdered. During 
a great horse race, Basilius closed in on Bardas in the crowd and stabbed 
him to death. Soon after, Basilius asked that he replace Bardas as head of 
the army, where he could keep control of the realm and quell rebellion. 
This was granted. 

Now Basilius’s power and wealth only grew, and a few years later 
Michael, in financial straits from his own extravagance, asked him to pay 
back some of the money he had borrowed over the years. To Michael’s 
shock and astonishment, Basilius refused, with a look of such impudence 


To have a good enemy, 
choose a friend: He 
knows where to strike . 

DlANE DB POITIBRS, 

1499-1566, MISTRESS OF 
Henri II of France 


Every time / bestow a 
vacant office. I make a 
hundred discontented 
persons and one 
ingraie. 

LOUIS XIV, 1638-1715 


Thus for my own part 
f have more than once 
been deceived by the 
person l loved most 
and of whose love, 
above everyone eise s, 
l have been most confi¬ 
dent. So that I believe 
that it 
love ai 
person above all others, 
according to merit and 
worth . but never to 
trust so much in this 
tempting trap of friend¬ 
ship as to have cause to 
repent of it later on. 

Baldassare 

Castjguone, 

1478-1529 


may be right to 
nctserve one 


LAW 2 


9 



thk 

SNAKE. THK 


i'AI{Mi*.U. AND Till' 


HERON 

A snake chased by 
hunters asked a farmer 
to save its life. To hide it 
from its pursuers, the 
farmer squatted and let 
the snake crawl into his 
belly. But when the 
danger had passed and 
the farmer asked the 
snake tv come out, the 
snake refused. It was 
warm and safe inside. 
On his way home, the 
man saw a heron and 
went up to him and 
whispered what had 
happened. The heron 
told him to squat and 
strain to eject the 
snake. When the snake 
muck its head out, the 
heron caught it, pulled it. 
out, and killed it. The 
farmer was worried that 
the snake's poison 
might still be inside 
him, and the heron 
told him that the cure 
for snake poison was 
to cook and eat six 
white fowl. "You're 
a white fowl, " 
said the farmer. 

"You'll do for a 
start ." He grabbed 
the heron, put it in a 
bag, and carried it 
home, where he 
hung it up while he 
told his wife what 
had happened. 
"I'm surprised at 
you ," said the wife. 
“The. bird does 
you a kindness, 
rids you of the evil 
in your belly, 
saves your life in 
fact, yet you 
catch it and talk 
of killing it ." 

She immedi¬ 
ately released 
the heron, and 
it flew away. 

But on its 
way, it gouged 
out her eyes, 

M oral: 

When you 
see water 
flow i n g 
uphill, it 
means that 


that the emperor suddenly realized his predicament: The former stable 
boy had more money, more allies in the army and senate, and in the end 
more power than the emperor himself. A few weeks later, after a night of 
heavy drinking, Michael awoke to find himself surrounded by soldiers. 
Basilius watched as they stabbed the emperor to death. Then, after pro¬ 
claiming himself emperor, he rode his horse through the streets of Byzan¬ 
tium, brandishing die head of his former benefactor and best friend at the 
end of a long pike. 

Interpretation 

Michael III staked his future on the sense of gratitude he thought Basilius 
must feel for him. Surely Basilius would serve him best; he owed the em¬ 
peror his wealth, his education, and his position. Then, once Basilius was in 
power, anything he needed it was best to give to him, strengthening the 
bonds between the two men. It was only on the fateful day when the em¬ 
peror saw that impudent smile on Basilius’s face that he realized his deadly 
mistake. 

He had created a monster. He had allowed a man to see power up 
close—a man who then wanted more, who asked for anything and got it, 
who felt encumbered by the charity he had received and simply did what 
many people do in such a situation: They forget the favors they have re¬ 
ceived and imagine they have earned their success by their own merits. 

At Michael’s moment of realization, he could still have saved his own 
life, but friendship and love blind every man to their interests. Nobody be¬ 
lieves a friend can betray. And Michael went on disbelieving until the day 
his head ended up on a pike. 

Lord, protect me from my friends; I can take care, of my enemies. 

Voltaire, 1694-1778 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

For several centuries after the fall of the Han Dynasty (a.D. 222), Chinese his¬ 
tory followed the same pattern of violent and bloody coups, one after the 
other. Army men would plot to kill a weak emperor, then would replace him 
on the Dragon Throne with a strong general. The general would start a new 
dynasty and crown himself emperor; to ensure his own survival he would kill 
off his fellow generals. A few years later, however, the pattern would resume: 
New generals would rise up and assassinate him or his sons in their turn. To 
be emperor of China was to be alone, surrounded by a pack of enemies—it 
was the least powerful, least secure position in the realm. 

In a.d. 959, General Chao K’uang-yin became Emperor Sung. He 
knew the odds, the probability that within a year or two he would be mur¬ 
dered; how could he break the pattern? Soon after becoming emperor, 
Sung ordered a banquet to celebrate the new dynasty, and invited the most 
powerful commanders in the army. After they had drunk much wine, he 


someone is repaying a kindness. 

African folk tale 



dismissed the guards and everybody else except the generals, who now 
feared he would murder them in one fell swoop. Instead, he addressed 
them: “The whole day is spent in fear, and I am unhappy both at the table 
and in my bed. For which one of you does not dream of ascending the 
throne? I do not doubt your allegiance, but if by some chance your subor¬ 
dinates, seeking wealth and position, were to force the emperor’s yellow 
robe upon you in turn, how could you refuse it?” Drank and fearing for 
their lives, the generals proclaimed their innocence and their loyalty. But 
Sung had other ideas: “The best way to pass one’s days is in peaceful en¬ 
joyment of riches and honor. If you are willing to give up your commands, 
I am ready to provide you with fine estates and beautiful dwellings where 
you may take your pleasure with singers and girls as your companions.” 

The astonished generals realized that instead of a life of anxiety and 
struggle Sung was offering them riches and security. The next day, all of 
the generals tendered their resignations, and they retired as nobles to the 
estates that Sung bestowed on them. 

In one stroke, Sung turned a pack of “friendly” wolves, who would 
likely have betrayed him, into a group of docile lambs, far from all power. 

Over the next few years Sung continued his campaign to secure his 
rule. In A.D. 971, King Liu of the Southern Han finally surrendered to him 
after years of rebellion. To Liu’s astonishment. Sung gave him a rank in the 
imperial court and invited him to the palace to seal their newfound friend¬ 
ship with wine. As King Liu took the glass that Sung offered him, he hesi¬ 
tated, fearing it contained poison. “Your subject’s crimes certainly merit 
death,” he cried out, “but I beg Your Majesty to spare your subject’s life. In¬ 
deed I dare not drink this wine.” Emperor Sung laughed, took the glass 
from Liu, and swallowed it himself. There was no poison. From then on 
Liu became his most trusted and loyal friend. 

At the time, China had splintered into many smaller kingdoms. When 
Ch’ien Shu, the king of one of these, was defeated, Sung’s ministers ad¬ 
vised the emperor to lock this rebel up. They presented documents prov¬ 
ing that he was still conspiring to kill Sung. When Ch’ien Shu came to visit 
the emperor, however, instead of locking him up, Sung honored him. He 
also gave him a package, which he told the former king to open when he 
was halfway home. Ch’ien Shu opened the bundle on his return journey 
and saw that it contained all the papers documenting his conspiracy. He re¬ 
alized that Sung knew of his murderous plans, yet had spared him nonethe¬ 
less. This generosity' won him over, and he too became one of Sung’s most 
loyal vassals. 

Interpretation 

A Chinese proverb compares friends to the jaws and teeth of a dangerous 
animal: If you are not careful, you will find them chewing you up. Emperor 
Sung knew the jaws he was passing between when he assumed the throne: 
His “friends” in the army would chew him up like meat, and if he some¬ 
how survived, his “friends” in the government would have him for supper. 


There are many who 
think therefore that a 
wise prince ought, 
when he has the 
chance, to foment 
astutely some enmity, 
so that by suppressing 
it he will augment his 
greatness. Princes, and 
especially new ones, 
have found more faith 
and more usefulness in 
those men, whom at the 
beginning of their 
power they regarded 
with suspicion, than in 
those they at first 
confided in. Pandolfo 
Pet rued, prince of 
Siena, governed his 
state more by those 
whom he. suspected 
than by others. 

N jocolo Mach iavelll 
1469-1527 


A brahman, a great 
expert in Veda who has 
become a great archer 
as well, offers his 
services to his good 
friend, who is now the 
king. The brahman 
cries out when he sees 
the king, "Recognize 
me, your friend /*' The 
king answers him with 
contempt and then 
explains :" Yes, we were 
friends before, but our 
friendship was based 
on what power we 
had.... 1 was friends 
with you. good 
brahman, because it 
served my purpose. No 
pauper is friend to the 
rich , no fool to the 
wise, no coward to the 


LAW 2 11 



brave. An old friend — 
who needs hint? It is 
two men of equal 
wealth and equal birth 
who contract friend¬ 
ship and marriage, not 
a rich man and a 
pauper... .An old 
friend - who needs 
him? 

THE MAHABHARATA, 
C. THIRD CENTURY B.C. 


Pick up a bee from 
kindness, and learn the 
limitations of kindness. 

Sufi proverb 


Emperor Sung would have no truck with ‘'friends'’—he bribed his fellow 
generals with splendid estates and kept them far away. This was a much 
better way to emasculate them than killing them, which would only have 
led other generals to seek vengeance. And Sung would have nothing to do 
with “friendly” ministers. More often than not, they would end up drinking 
his famous cup of poisoned wine. 

Instead of relying on friends. Sung used his enemies, one after the 
other, transforming them into far more reliable subjects. While a friend ex¬ 
pects more and more favors, and seethes with jealousy, these former ene¬ 
mies expected nothing and got everything. A man suddenly spared the 
guillotine is a grateful man indeed, and will go to the ends of the earth for 
the man who has pardoned him. In time, these former enemies became 
Sung’s most trusted Mends. 

And Sung was finally able to break the pattern of coups, violence, and 
civil war—the Sung Dynasty ruled China for more than three hundred 
years. 


In a speech Abraham Lincoln delivered at the height of the Civil War, 
he referred to the Southerners as fellow human beings who were in 
error. An elderly lady chastised him for not calling them irreconcilable 
enemies who must be destroyed. “Why, madamf Lincoln replied, 

*do I not destroy my enemies when / make them my friends?* 


Men are more ready to 
repay an injury than a 
benefit, because grati¬ 
tude is a burden and 
revenge a pleasure. 
Tacitus, c. a.d. 55-120 


KEYS TO POWER 

It is natural to want to employ your friends when you find yourself in times 
of need. The world is a harsh place, and your friends soften the harshness. 
Besides, you know diem. Why depend on a stranger when you have a 
friend at hand? 

The problem is that you often do not know your friends as well as you 
imagine. Friends often agree on things in order to avoid an argument. 
They cover up their unpleasant qualities so as to not offend each other. 
They laugh extra hard at each other’s jokes. Since honesty rarely strength¬ 
ens friendship, you may never know how a friend truly feels. Friends will 
say that they love your poetry, adore your music, envy your taste in 
clothes—maybe they mean it, often they do not. 

When you decide to hire a Mend, you gradually discover the qualities 
he or she has kept hidden. Strangely enough, it is your act of kindness that 
unbalances everything. People want to feel they deserve their good for¬ 
tune. The receipt of a favor can become oppressive: It means you have 
been chosen because you are a friend, not necessarily because you are de¬ 
serving. There is almost a touch of condescension in the act of hiring 
Mends that secretly afflicts them. The injury will come out slowly: A little 
more honesty, flashes of resentment and envy here and there, and before 
you know it your Mendship fades. The more favors and gifts you supply to 
revive the friendship, the less gratitude you receive. 

Ingratitude has a long and deep history. It has demonstrated its powers 


12 


LAW 2 



for so many centuries, that it is truly amazing that people continue to un¬ 
derestimate them. Better to be wary. If you never expect gratitude from a 
friend, you will be pleasantly surprised when they do prove grateful. 

The problem with using or hiring friends is that it will inevitably limit 
your power. The friend is rarely the one who is most able to help you; and 
in the end, skill and competence are far more important than friendly feel¬ 
ings. (Michael III had a man right under his nose who would have steered 
him right and kept him alive: That man was Bardas.) 

All working situations require a kind of distance between people. You 
are trying to work, not make friends; friendliness (real or false) only ob¬ 
scures that fact The key to power, then, is the ability to judge who is best 
able to further your interests in all situations. Keep friends for friendship, 
but work with the skilled and competent. 

Your enemies, on the other hand, are an untapped gold mine that you 
must learn to exploit. When Talleyrand, Napoleon’s foreign minister, de 
cided in 1807 that his boss was leading France to ruin, and the time had 
come to turn against him, he understood the dangers of conspiring against 
the emperor; he needed a partner, a confederate—what friend could he 
trust in such a project? He chose Joseph Fouche, head of the secret police, 
his most hated enemy, a man who had even tried to have him assassinated. 
He knew that their former hatred would create an opportunity for an emo¬ 
tional reconciliation. He knew that Fouche would expect nothing from 
him, and in fact would work to prove that he was worthy of Talleyrand’s 
choice; a person who has something to prove will move mountains for you. 
Finally, he knew that his relationship with Fouche would be based on mu¬ 
tual self-interest, and would not be contaminated by personal feeling. The 
selection proved perfect; although the conspirators did not succeed in top¬ 
pling Napoleon, the union of such powerful but unlikely partners gener¬ 
ated much interest in the cause; opposition to the emperor slowly began to 
spread. And from then on, Talleyrand and Fouche had a fruitful working 
relationship. Whenever you can, bury the hatchet with an enemy, and 
make a point of putting him in your service. 

As Lincoln said, you destroy an enemy when you make a friend of 
him. In 1971, during the Vietnam War, Henry Kissinger was the target of 
an unsuccessful kidnapping attempt, a conspiracy involving, among others, 
the renowned antiwar activist priests the Berrigan brothers, four more 
Catholic priests, and four nuns. In private, without informing the Secret 
Service or the Justice Department, Kissinger arranged a Saturday-morning 
meeting with three of the alleged kidnappers. Explaining to his guests that 
he would have most American soldiers out of Vietnam by mid-1972, he 
completely charmed them. They gave him some “Kidnap Kissinger” but¬ 
tons and one of them remained a friend of his for years, visiting him on 
several occasions. This was not just a onetime ploy: Kissinger made a pol¬ 
icy of working with those who disagreed with him. Colleagues commented 
that he seemed to get along better with his enemies than with his friends. 

Without enemies around us, we grow lazy. An enemy at our heels 
sharpens our wits, keeping us focused and alert. It is sometimes better, 


PliOMTiM, BY Ol'H 
km; M IKS 

King Hiero chanced 
upon a time, speaking 
with one of his 
enemies, to he told in a 
reproachful manner 
that he had stinking 
breath. Whereupon the 
good king, being some¬ 
what dismayed in 
himself as soon as he 
returned home chided 
his wife, How does it 
happen that yon never 
told me of this prob¬ 
lem?" The woman, 
being a simple, chaste, 
and harmless dame, 
said . ‘Sir, l had thought 
all men s breath had 
smelled so, ” Thus it is 
plain that faults that 
are evident to (he 
senses, gross and 
corporal, or otherwise 
notorious to the world, 
we know by our 
enemies sooner than 
by our friends and 
familiars. 

Plutarch. 
c, A. lx 46-120 


LAW 2 13 



then, to use enemies as enemies rather than transforming them into friends 
or allies. 

Mao Tse-tung saw conflict as key in his approach to power. In 1937 the 
Japanese invaded China, interrupting the civil war between Mao’s Com¬ 
munists and their enemy, the Nationalists. 

Fearing that the Japanese would wipe them out, some Communist 
leaders advocated leaving the Nationalists to fight the Japanese, and using 
the time to recuperate. Mao disagreed: The Japanese could not possibly 
defeat and occupy a vast country like China for long. Once they left, the 
Communists would have grown rusty if they had been out of combat for 
several years, and would be ill prepared to reopen their struggle with the 
Nationalists. To fight a formidable foe like the Japanese, in fact, would be 
the perfect training for the Communists’ ragtag army, Mao’s plan was 
adopted, and it worked: By the time the Japanese finally retreated, the 
Communists had gained the fighting experience that helped them defeat 
the Nationalists. 

Years later, a Japanese visitor tried to apologize to Mao for his coun¬ 
try’s invasion of China. Mao interrupted, “Should I not thank you in¬ 
stead?” Without a worthy opponent, he explained, a man or group cannot 
grow stronger. 

Mao’s strategy of constant conflict has several key components. First, 
be certain that in the long run you will emerge victorious. Never pick a 
fight with someone you are not sure you can defeat, as Mao knew the 
Japanese would be defeated in time. Second, if you have no apparent ene¬ 
mies, you must sometimes set up a convenient target, even turning a friend 
into an enemy. Mao used this tactic time and again in politics. Third, use 
such enemies to define your cause more clearly to the public, even framing 
it as a struggle of good against evil. Mao actually encouraged China’s dis¬ 
agreements with the Soviet Union and the United States; without clear-cut 
enemies, he believed, his people would lose any sense of what Chinese 
Communism meant A sharply defined enemy is a far stronger argument 
for your side than all the words you could possibly put together. 

Never let the presence of enemies upset or distress you—you are far 
better off with a declared opponent or two than not knowing where your 
real enemies lie. The man of power welcomes conflict, using enemies to 
enhance his reputation as a surefooted fighter who can be relied upon in 
times of uncertainty'. 



Image: The Jaws of Ingratitude. 
Knowing what would happen 
if you put a finger in 
the mouth of a lion, 
you would stay 
clear of it. 

With friends 
you will have 
no such caution, and 
if you hire them, they will 


Authority: 
Know how to use 
enemies for your own 
profit. You must learn to grab a 
sword not by its blade, which would 
cut you, but by the handle, which allows 
you to defend yourself. The wise man 
profits more from his enemies, 
than a fool from his friends. 
(Baltasar Gracian, 


eat you alive with ingratitude. 


1601 - 1658 ) 


REVERSAL 

Although it is generally best not to mix work with friendship, there are 
times when a friend can be used to greater effect than an enemy. A man of 
power, for example, often has dirty work that has to be done, but for the 
sake of appearances it is generally preferable to have other people do it for 
him; friends often do this the best, since their affection for him makes them 
willing to take chances. Also, if your plans go awry for some reason, you 
can use a friend as a convenient scapegoat. This “fall of the favorite” was a 
trick often used by kings and sovereigns: They would let their closest friend 
at court take the fall for a mistake, since the public would not believe that 
they would deliberately sacrifice a friend for such a purpose. Of course, 
after you play that card, you have lost your friend forever. It is best, then, to 
reserve the scapegoat role for someone who is close to you but not too 
close. 

Finally, the problem about working with friends is that it confuses the 
boundaries and distances that working requires. But if both partners in the 
arrangement understand the dangers involved, a friend often can be em¬ 
ployed to great effect. You must never let your guard down in such a ven¬ 
ture, however; always be on the lookout for any signs of emotional 
disturbance such as envy and ingratitude. Nothing is stable in the realm of 
power, and even the closest of friends can be transformed into the worst of 
enemies. 



LAW 


3 

CONCEAL YOUR 
INTENTIONS 


JUDGMENT 

Keep people off-balance and in the dark by never reveal¬ 
ing the purpose behind your actions. If they have no clue 
what you are up to, they cannot prepare a defense . Guide 
them far enough down the wrong path, envelop them in 
enough smoke, and by the time they realize, your inten¬ 
tions, it will be too late. 



PART I: USE DECOYED OBJECTS OF DESIRE AND RED 
HERRINGS TO THROW PEOPLE OFF THE SCENT 

If at any point in the deception you practice people have the slightest suspi¬ 
cion as to your intentions , all is lost. Do not give them the chance to sense 
what you are up to: Throw them off the scent by dragging red herrings 
across the path . Use false sincerity, send ambiguous signals, set up mis¬ 
leading objects of desire. Unable to distinguish the genuine from the false, 
they cannot pick out your real goal. 

TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

Over several weeks, Ninon de Lenclos, the most infamous courtesan of 
seventeenth-century France, listened patiently as the Marquis de Sevigne 
explained his struggles in pursuing a beautiful but difficult young countess. 
Ninon was sixty-two at the time, and more than experienced in matters of 
love; die marquis was a lad of twenty-two, handsome, dashing, but hope¬ 
lessly inexperienced in romance. At first Ninon was amused to hear the 
marquis talk about his mistakes, but finally she had had enough. Unable to 
bear ineptitude in any realm, least of all in seducing a woman, she decided 
to take the young man under her wing. First, he had to understand that this 
was war, and that the beautiful countess was a citadel to which he had to 
lay siege as carefully as any general. Every step had to be planned and exe¬ 
cuted with the utmost attention to detail and nuance. 

Instructing the marquis to start over, Ninon told him to approach the 
countess with a bit of distance, an air of nonchalance. The next time the 
two were alone together, she said, he would confide in the countess as 
would a friend but not a potential lover. This was to throw her off the scent. 
The countess was no longer to take his interest in her for granted—perhaps 
he was only interested in friendship. 

Ninon planned ahead. Once the countess was confused, it would be 
time to make her jealous. At the next encounter, at a major fete in Paris, the 
marquis would show up with a beautiful young woman at his side. This 
beautiful young woman had equally beautiful friends, so that wherever the 
countess would now see the marquis, he would be surrounded by the most 
stunning young women in Paris. Not only would the countess be seething 
with jealousy, she would come to see the marquis as someone who was de¬ 
sired by others. It was hard for Ninon to make the marquis understand, but 
she patiently explained that a woman who is interested in a man wants to 
see that other women are interested in him, too. Not only does that give 
him instant value, it makes it all the more satisfying to snatch him from 
their clutches. 

Once the countess was jealous but intrigued, it would be time to be¬ 
guile her. On Ninon’s instructions, the marquis would fail to show up at af¬ 
fairs where the countess expected to see him. Then, suddenly, he would 
appeal' at salons he had never frequented before, but that the countess at- 



tended often. She would be unable to predict his moves. All of this would 
push her into the state of emotional confusion that is a prerequisite for sue* 
cessfal seduction. 

These moves were executed, and took several weeks. Ninon moni¬ 
tored the marquis’s progress: Through her network of spies, she heard how 
the countess would laugh a little harder at his witticisms, listen more 
closely to his stories. She heard that the countess was suddenly asking ques¬ 
tions about him. Her friends told her that at social affairs the countess 
would often look up at the marquis, following his steps. Ninon felt certain 
that the young woman was failing under his spell. It was a matter of weeks 
now, maybe a month or two, but if all went smoothly, the citadel would 
fall. 

A few days later the marquis was at the countess’s home. They were 
alone. Suddenly he was a different man: This time acting on his own im¬ 
pulse, rather than following Ninon’s instructions, he took the countess’s 
hands and told her he was in love with her. The young woman seemed 
confused, a reaction he did not expect She became polite, then excused 
herself. For the rest of the evening she avoided his eyes, was not there to 
say good night to him. The next few times he visited he was told she was 
not at home. When she finally admitted him again, the two felt awkward 
and uncomfortable with each other. Hie spell was broken. 


Interpretation 

Ninon de Lenclos knew everything about the art of love. The greatest writ¬ 
ers, thinkers, and politicians of the time had been her lovers—men like La 
Rochefoucauld, Moliere, and Richelieu. Seduction was a game to her, to be 
practiced with skill. As she got older, and her reputation grew, the most im¬ 
portant families in France would send their sons to her to be instructed in 
matters of love. 

Ninon knew that men and women are very different, but when it 
comes to seduction they feel the same: Deep down inside, they often sense 
when they are being seduced, but they give in because they enjoy the feel¬ 
ing of being led along. It is a pleasure to let go, and to allow the other per¬ 
son to detour you into a strange country. Everything in seduction, 
however, depends on suggestion. You cannot announce your intentions or 
reveal them directly in words. Instead you must throw your targets off the 
scent. To surrender to your guidance they must be appropriately confused. 
You have to scramble your signals—appear interested in another man or 
woman (the decoy), then hint at being interested in the target, then feign 
indifference, on and on. Such patterns not only confuse, they excite. 

Imagine this story from the countess’s perspective: After a few of the 
marquis’s moves, she sensed the marquis was playing some sort of game, 
but the game delighted her. She did not know where he was leading her, 
but so much the better. His moves intrigued her, each of them keeping her 
waiting for the next one—she even enjoyed her jealousy and confusion, for 
sometimes any emotion is better than the boredom of security. Perhaps the 
marquis had ulterior motives; most men do. But she was willing to wait and 



see, and probably if she had been made to wait long enough, what he was 
up to would not have mattered. 

The moment the marquis uttered that fatal word “love,” however, all 
was changed. This was no longer a game with moves, it was an artless show 
of passion. His intention was revealed: He was seducing her. This put 
everything he had done in a new light. All that before had been charming- 
now seemed ugly and conniving; the countess felt embarrassed and used. 
A door closed that would never open again. 

Do not be held a cheat , even though it is impossible to live today without being one. 
Let your greatest cunning lie in covering up what looks like cunning. 

HaItasar Qracian , 1601 J6 5 8 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

In 1850 the young Otto von Bismarck, then a thirty-five-year-old deputy in 
the Prussian parliament, was at a turning point in his career. The issues of 
the day were the unification of the many states (including Prussia) into 
which Germany w as then divided, and a war against Austria, the powerful 
neighbor to the south that hoped to keep the Germans weak and at odds, 
even threatening to intervene if they tried to unite. Prince William, next in 
line to be Prussia’s king, was in favor of going to war, and the parliament 
rallied to the cause, prepared to back any mobilization of troops. The only 
ones to oppose war were the present king, Frederick William IV, and his 
ministers, who preferred to appease the powerful Austrians. 

Throughout his career, Bismarck had been a loyal, even passionate 
supporter of Prussian might and power. He dreamed of German unifica¬ 
tion, of going to war against Austria and humiliating the country’ that for so 
long had kept Germany divided. A former soldier, he saw warfare as a glo¬ 
rious business. 

This, after all, was the man who years later would say, “The great 
questions of the time will be decided, not by speeches and resolutions, but 
by iron and blood.” 

Passionate patriot and lover of military glory, Bismarck nevertheless 
gave a speech in parliament at the height of the war fever that astonished 
all who heard it “Woe unto the statesman,” he said, “who makes war with¬ 
out a reason that will still be valid when the war is over! After the war, you 
will all look differently at these questions. Will you then have the courage 
to turn to the peasant contemplating the ashes of his farm, to the man who 
has been crippled, to the father who has lost his children?” Not only did 
Bismarck go on to talk of the madness of this war, but, strangest of all, he 
praised Austria and defended her actions. This went against everything he 
had stood for. The consequences were immediate. Bismarck was against 
the war—what could this possibly mean? Other deputies were confused, 
and several of them changed their votes. Eventually the king and his minis¬ 
ters won out, and war was averted. 

A few weeks after Bismarck’s infamous speech, the king, grateful that 




he had spoken for peace, made him a cabinet minister, A few years later he 
became the Prussian premier. In this role he eventually led his country and 
a peace-loving king into a war against Austria, crushing the former empire 
and establishing a mighty German state, with Prussia at its head. 

Interpretation 

At the time of his speech in 1850, Bismarck made several calculations. 
First, he sensed that the Prussian military, which had not kept pace with 
other European armies, was unready for war—that Austria, in fact, might 
very well win, a disastrous result for the future. Second, if the war were lost 
and Bismarck had supported it, his career would be gravely jeopardized. 
The king and his conservative ministers wanted peace; Bismarck wanted 
power. The answer was to throw people off the scent by supporting a cause 
he detested, saying things he would laugh at if said by another. A whole 
country was fooled. It was because of Bismarck's speech that the king made 
him a minister, a position from which he quickly rose to be prime minister, 
attaining the power to strengthen the Prussian military and accomplish 
what he had wanted all along: the humiliation of Austria and the unifica 
tion of Germany under Prussia’s leadership. 

Bismarck was certainly one of die cleverest statesman who ever lived, 
a master of strategy 7 and deception. No one suspected what he was up to in 
this case. Had he announced his real intentions, arguing that it was better 
to wait now and fight later, he would not have won the argument, since 
most Prussians wanted war at that moment and mistakenly believed that 
their army was superior to the Austrians. Had he played up to the king, 
asking to be made a minister in exchange for supporting peace, he would 
not have succeeded either: The king would have distrusted his ambition 
and doubted his sincerity. 

By being completely insincere and sending misleading signals, how¬ 
ever, he deceived everyone, concealed his purpose, and attained every¬ 
thing he wanted. Such is the power of hiding your intentions. 


KEYS TO POWER 

Most people are open books. They say what they feel, blurt out their opin¬ 
ions at every opportunity, and constantly reveal their plans and intentions. 
They do this for several reasons. First, it is easy and natural to always want 
to talk about one’s feelings and plans for the future. It takes effort to contr ol 
your tongue and monitor what you reveal. Second, many believe that by 
being honest and open they are winning people’s hearts and showing their 
good natuxe.They are greatly deluded. Honesty is actually a blunt instru¬ 
ment, which bloodies more than it cuts. Your honesty is likely to offend 
people; it is much more prudent to tailor your words, telling people what 
they want to hear rather than the coarse and ugly truth of what you feel or 
think. More important, by being unabashedly open you make yourself so 
predictable and familiar that it is almost impossible to respect or fear you, 
and power will not accrue to a person who cannot inspire such emotions. 



If you yearn for power, quickly lay honesty aside, and train yourself in 
the art of concealing your intentions. Master the art and you will always 
have the upper hand. Basic to an ability to conceal one’s intentions is a 
simple truth about human nature: Our first instinct is to always trust ap¬ 
pearances. We cannot go around doubting the reality of what we see and 
hear—constantly imagining that appearances concealed something else 
would exhaust and terrify us. This fact makes it relatively easy to conceal 
one’s intentions. Simply dangle an object you seem to desire, a goal you 
seem to aim for, in front of people’s eyes and they will take the appearance 
for reality. Once their eyes focus on the decoy, they will fail to notice what 
you are really up to. In seduction, set up conflicting ,signals, such as desire 
and indifference, and you not only throw them off the scent, you inflame 
their desire to possess you. 

A tactic that is often effective in setting up a red herring is to appear to 
support an idea or cause that is actually contrary to your own sentiments. 
(Bismarck used tills to great effect in his speech in 1850.) Most people wall 
believe you have experienced a change of heart, since it is so unusual to 
play so lightly with something as emotional as one’s opinions and values. 
The same applies for any decoyed object of desire: Seem to want some¬ 
thing in which you are actually not at all interested and your enemies will 
be thrown off the scent, making all kinds of errors in their calculations. 

During the War of the Spanish Succession in 1711, the Duke of Marl¬ 
borough, head of the English army, wanted to destroy a key French fort, 
because it protected a vital thoroughfare into France. Yet he knew that if he 
destroyed it, the French would realize what he wanted—to advance down 
that road. Instead, then, he merely captured the fort, and garrisoned it with 
some of his troops, making it appear as if he wanted it for some purpose of 
his own. The French attacked the fort and the duke let them recapture it. 
Once they had it back, though, they destroyed it, figuring that the duke had 
wanted it for some important reason. Now that the fort was gone, the road 
was unprotected, and Marlborough could easily march into France. 

Use this tactic in the following manner: Hide your intentions not by 
closing up {with the risk of appearing secretive, and making people suspi¬ 
cious) but by talking endlessly about your desires and goals—just not your 
real ones. You will kill three birds with one stone: You appear friendly, 
open, and trusting; you conceal your intentions; and you send your rivals 
on time-consuming wild-goose chases. 

Another powerful tool in throwing people off the scent is false sincer¬ 
ity. People easily mistake sincerity for honesty. Remember—-their first in¬ 
stinct is to trust appearances, and since they value honesty and want to 
believe in the honesty of those around them, they will rarely doubt you or 
see through your act. Seeming to believe what you say gives your words 
great weight. This is how Iago deceived and destroyed Othello: Given the 
depth of his emotions, the apparent sincerity of his concerns about Desde- 
mona’s supposed infidelity, how could Othello distrust him? This is also 
how the great con artist Yellow Kid Weil pulled the wool over suckers’ 
eyes: Seeming to believe so deeply in the decoyed object he was dangling 


LAW 3 21 



in front of them (a phony stock, a touted racehorse), he made its reality 
hard to doubt. It is important, of course, not to go too far in this area. Sin- 
cerity is a tricky tool: Appear overpassionate and you raise suspicions. Be 
measured and believable or your ruse will seem the put-on that it is. 

To make your false sincerity an effective weapon in concealing your 
intentions, espouse a belief in honesty and forthrightness as important so¬ 
cial values. Do this as publicly as possible. Emphasize your position on this 
subject by occasionally divulging some heartfelt thought—though only one 
that is actually meaningless or irrelevant, of course. Napoleon’s minister 
Talleyrand was a master at taking people into his confidence by revealing 
some apparent secret. This feigned confidence—a decoy—would then 
elicit a real confidence on the other person’s part. 

Remember: The best deceivers do everything they can to cloak their 
J roguish qualities. They cultivate an air of honesty in one area to disguise 
j their dishonesty in others. Honesty is merely another decoy in their arsenal 
of weapons. 




PART II: USE SMOKE SCREENS TO 
DISGUISE YOUR ACTIONS 

Deception is always the best strategy, but the best deceptions require a screen 
of smoke to distract people’s attention from your real purpose. The bland 
exterior—like the unreadable poker face—is often the perfect smoke screen, 
hiding your intentions behind the comfortable and familiar. If you lead the 
sucker down a familiar path, he won *t catch on when you lead him into a 
trap. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I 

In 1910, a Mr. Sam Geezil of Chicago sold his warehouse business for close 
to $1 million. He settled down to semiretirement and the managing of his 
many properties, but deep inside he itched for the old days of deal-making. 
One day a young man named Joseph Weil visited his office, wanting to buy 
an apartment he had up for sale. Geezil explained the terms: The price was 
$8,000, but he only required a down payment of $2,000. Weil said he 
would sleep on it, but he came back the following day and offered to pay 
the full $8,000 in cash, if Geezil could wait a couple of days, until a deal 
Weil was working on came through. Even in semiretirement, a clever busi¬ 
nessman like Geezil was curious as to how Weil would be able to come up 
with so much cash (roughly $150,000 today) so quickly. Wed seemed reluc¬ 
tant to say, and quickly changed the subject, but Geezil was persistent. Fi¬ 
nally, after assurances of confidentiality, Weil told Geezil the following 
story. 

Weil’s uncle was the secretary to a coterie of multimillionaire fi¬ 
nanciers. These wealthy gentlemen had purchased a hunting lodge in 
Michigan ten years ago, at a cheap price. They had not used the lodge for a 
few years, so they had decided to sell it and had asked Weil’s unde to get 
whatever he could for it. For reasons—good reasons—of his own, the uncle 
had been nursing a grudge against the millionaires for years; this was his 
chance to get back at them. He would sell the property for $35,000 to a set¬ 
up man (whom it was Wed’s job to find). The financiers were too wealthy to 
worry about this low price. The set-up man would then turn around and 
sell the property again for its real price, around $155,000. The uncle, Weil, 
and the third man would split the profits from this second sale. It was all 
legal and for a good cause—the uncle’s just retribution. 

Geezil had heard enough: He wanted to be the set-up buyer. Weil was 
reluctant to involve him, but Geezil would not back down: The idea of a 
large profit, plus a little adventure, had him champing at the bit. Weil ex¬ 
plained that Geezd would have to put up the $35,000 in cash to bring the 
deal off. Geezd, a millionaire, said he could get the money with a snap of 
his fingers. Wed finally relented and agreed to arrange a meeting between 
the uncle, Geezd, and the financiers, in the town of Galesburg, Illinois. 

On the train ride to Galesburg, Geezil met the uncle—an impressive 


JKi 11 . KIND OK ISRAKI.. 
KK1CNH WORSHIP 01- 
Till, IDOL BA AL 

Then Jehu assembled 
all the people, and said 
to them, ''Ahah served 
Ba 'a! a little: but Jehu 
will serve him much 
more. Now therefore 
call to me all the 
prophets of Ba'al, all 
his worshippers and all 
his priests; let none he 
missing, for 1 have a 
great sacrifice to offer 
to Ba’al; whoever is 
missing shall not live. ” 
But Jehu did it with 
cunning in order to 
destroy the worship¬ 
pers of Ba ’al. 

And Jehu ordered , 
“Sanctify a solemn 
assembly for Ba 'al. ” So 
they proclaimed it. And 
Jehu sent throughout 
all Israel; and all the 
worshippers of Ba’al 
came, so that there was 
not a man left who did 
not come. And they 
entered the house of 
Ba ’al, and the house of 
Ba'al was filled from 
one end to the other.. .. 
Then Jehu went into 
the house of Ba'al... 
and he said to the 
worshippers of Ba’al, 

“Search, and see 
that there is no servant 
of the LORD here 


LAW 3 


23 




among you , but only 
the worshippers of 
Ba’al,” Then he went in 
to offer sacrifices and 
burnt offerings. 

Now Jehu had 
stationed eighty men 
outside, and said, " The 
man who allows any of 
those whom / give into 
your hands to escape 
shall forfeit his life. ” So 
as soon as he had made 
an end of offering the 
burnt offering, Jehu 
said to the guard and to 
the officers, “Go in and 
slay them; let not a man 
escape, ” 
So when they put them 
to the sword, the guard 
and the officers cast 
them out and went into 
the inner room of the 
house of Ba 'al and they 
brought out the pillar 
that was in the house of 
Ba’al and burned it. 
And they demolished 
the pillar of Ba’al and 
demolished the house 
of Ba’al, and made it a 
latrine to this day . 
Thus Jehu wiped out 
Ba 'al from Israel. 

OLD TESTAMENT, 
2 KINGS 10:18-28 


man, with whom he avidly discussed business. Weil also brought along a 
companion, a somewhat paunchy man named George Gross. Weil ex¬ 
plained to Geezil that he himself was a boxing trainer, that Gross was one 
of the promising prizefighters he trained, and that he had asked Gross to 
come along to make sure the fighter stayed in shape. For a promising 
fighter. Gross was unimpressive looking—he had gray hair and a beer 
belly—but Geezil was so excited about the deal that he didn’t really think 
about the man’s flabby appearance. 

Once in Galesburg, Weil and his uncle went to fetch the financiers 
while Geezil waited in a hotel room with Gross, who promptly put on his 
boxing trunks. As Geezil half watched, Gross began to shadowbox. Dis¬ 
tracted as he was, Geezil ignored how badly the boxer wheezed after a few 
minutes of exercise, although his style seemed real enough. An hour later, 
Weil and his uncle reappeared with the financiers, an impressive, intimidat¬ 
ing group of men, all wearing fancy suits. The meeting went well and the fi¬ 
nanciers agreed to sell the lodge to Geezil, who had already had the 
$35,000 wired to a local bank. 

This minor business now settled, the financiers sat back in their chairs 
and began to banter about high finance, throwing out the name P. Mor¬ 
gan” as if they knew the man. Finally one of them noticed the boxer in the 
comer of the room. Weil explained what he was doing there. The financier 
countered that he too had a boxer in his entourage, whom he named. Weil 
laughed brazenly and exclaimed that his man could easily knock out their 
man. Conversation escalated into argument. In the heat of passion, Weil 
challenged the men to a bet. The financiers eagerly agreed and left to get 
their man ready for a fight the next day. 

As soon as they had left, the unde yelled at Weil, right in front of 
Geezil: They did not have enough money to bet with, and once the fi¬ 
nanciers discovered this, the uncle would be fired. Weil apologized for get¬ 
ting him in this mess, but he had a plan: He knew the other boxer well, and 
with a little bribe, they could fix the fight. But where would the money 
come from for the bet? the uncle replied. Without it they were as good as 
dead. Finally Geezil had heard enough. Unwilling to jeopardize his deal 
with any ill will, he offered his own $35,000 cash for part of the bet. Even if 
he lost that, he would wire for more money and still make a profit on the 
sale of the lodge. The uncle and nephew thanked him. With their own 
$15,000 and Geezil’s $35,000 they would manage to have enough for the 
bet. That evening, as Geezil watched the two boxers rehearse the fix in 
the hotel room, his mind reeled at the killing he was going to make from both 
the boxing match and the sale of the lodge. 

The fight took place in a gym the next day. Weil handled the cash, 
which was placed for security in a locked box. Everything was pro¬ 
ceeding as planned in the hotel room. The financiers were looking glum at 
how badly their fighter was doing, and Geezil was dreaming about the easy 
money he was about to make. Then, suddenly, a wild swing by the fi¬ 
nancier’s fighter hit Gross hard in the face, knocking him down. When he 
hit the canvas, blood spurted from his mouth. He coughed, then lay still. 


24 LAW a 




One of the financiers, a former doctor, checked his pulse; he was dead. The 
millionaires panicked: Everyone had to get out before the police arrived— 
they could all be charged with murder. 

Terrified, Geezil hightailed it out of the gym and back to Chicago, leav¬ 
ing behind his $35,000 which he was only too glad to forget, for it seemed 
a small price to pay to avoid being implicated in a crime. He never wanted 
to see Weil or any of the others again. 

After Geezil scurried out, Gross stood up, under his own steam. The 
blood that had spurted from his mouth came from a ball filled with chicken 
blood and hot water that he had hidden in his cheek. The whole affair had 
been masterminded by Weil, better known as “the Yellow Kid,” one of the 
most creative con artists in history'. Weil split the $35,000 with the fi¬ 
nanciers and the boxers (all fellow con artists}—a nice little profit for a few 
days’ work. 

Interpretation 

The Yellow Kid had staked out Geezil as the perfect sucker long before he 
set up the con. He knew the boxing-match scam would be the perfect ruse 
to separate Geezil from his money quickly and definitively. But he also 
knew that if he had begun by trying to interest Geezil in the boxing match, 
he would have failed miserably. He had to conceal his intentions and 
switch attention, create a smoke screen—in this case the sale of the lodge. 

On the train ride and in the hotel room Geezil’s mind had been com¬ 
pletely occupied with the pending deal, the easy money, the chance to 
hobnob with wealthy men. He had failed to notice that Gross was out of 
shape and middle-aged at best. Such is the distracting power of a smoke 
screen. Engrossed in the business deal, GeeziPs attention was easily di¬ 
verted to the boxing match, but only at a point when it was already too late 
for him to notice the details that would have given Gross away. The match, 
after all, now depended on a bribe rather than on the boxer’s physical condi¬ 
tion. And Geezil was so distracted at the end by the illusion of the boxer’s death 
that he completely forgot about his money. 

Learn from the Yellow Kid: The familiar, inconspicuous front is the 
perfect smoke screen. Approach your mark with an idea that seems ordi¬ 
nary enough—a business deal, financial intrigue. The sucker’s mind is dis¬ 
tracted, his suspicions allayed. That is when you gently guide him onto the 
second path, the slippery slope down which he slides helplessly into your 
trap. 


SNEAK ACROSS THE 
OCEAN IN BROAD 
DAY EIGHT 

This means to create a 
front that eventually 
becomes imbued with 
an atmosphere or 
impression of familiar¬ 
ity, within which the 
strategist may maneu¬ 
ver unseen while all 
eyes are trained to see 
obvious familiarities , 

“THE THIRTY-SIX 
STRATEGIES," QUOTED IN 
THE JAPANESE ART OF 
WAR, 

Thomas Cleary, 1991 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II 

In the mid- 1920s, the powerful warlords of Ethiopia were coming to die re¬ 
alization that a young man of the nobility named Haile Selassie, also 
known as Ras Tafari, was outcompeting them all and nearing the point 
where he could proclaim himself their leader, unifying the country for the 
first time in decades. Most of his rivals could not understand how this 
wispy,' quiet, mild-mannered man had been able to take control. Yet in 


LAW 3 1 25 



1927, Selassie was able to summon the warlords, one at a time, to come to 
Addis Ababa to declare their loyalty and recognize him as leader. 

Some hurried, some hesitated, but only one, Dejazmach Balcha of 
Sidamo, dared defy Selassie totally. A blustery man, Balcha was a great 
warrior, and he considered the new leader weak and unworthy. He point¬ 
edly stayed away from the capital. Finally Selassie, in his gentle but stem 
way, commanded Balcha to come. The warlord decided to obey, but in 
doing so he would turn the tables on this pretender to the Ethiopian 
throne: He would come to Addis Ababa at his own speed, and with an 
army of 10,000 men, a force large enough to defend himself, perhaps even 
start a civil wax. Stationing this formidable force in a valley three miles 
from the capital, he waited, as a king would. Selassie would have to come 
to him. 

Selassie did indeed send emissaries, asking Balcha to attend an after¬ 
noon banquet in his honor. But Balcha, no fool, knew history—he knew 
that previous kings and lords of Ethiopia had used banquets as a trap. 
Once he was there and full of drink, Selassie would have him arrested or 
murdered. To signal his understanding of the situation, he agreed to come 
to the banquet, but only if he could bring his personal bodyguard—600 of 
his best soldiers, all armed and ready to defend him and themselves. To 
Balcha’s surprise, Selassie answered with the utmost politeness that he 
would be honored to play host to such warriors. 

On the way to the banquet, Balcha warned his soldiers not to get 
drunk and to be on their guard. When they arrived at the palace, Selassie 
was his charming best. He deferred to Balcha, treated him as if he desper¬ 
ately needed his approval and cooperation. But Balcha refused to be 
charmed, and he warned Selassie that if he did not return to his camp by 
nightfall, his army had orders to attack the capital. Selassie reacted as if 
hurt by his mistrust. Over the meal, when it came time for the traditional 
singing of songs in honor of Ethiopia’s leaders, he made a point of allowing 
only songs honoring the warlord of Sidamo. It seemed to Balcha that Se¬ 
lassie was scared, intimidated by this great warrior who could not be out¬ 
witted. Sensing the change, Balcha believed that he would be the one to 
call the shots in the days to come. 

At the end of the afternoon, Balcha and his soldiers began their march 
back to camp amidst cheers and gun salutes. Looking back to the capital 
over his shoulder, he planned his strategy—how his own soldiers would 
march through the capital in triumph within weeks, and Selassie would be 
put in his place, his place being either prison or death. When Balcha came 
in sight of his camp, however, he saw that something was terribly wrong. 
Where before there had been colorful tents stretching as far as the eye 
could see, now there was nothing, only smoke from doused fires. What 
devil’s magic was this? 

A witness told Balcha what had happened. During the banquet, a large 
army, commanded by an ally of Selassie’s, had stolen up on Balcha’s en¬ 
campment by a side route he had not seen. This army had not come to 
fight, however: Knowing that Balcha wouldjhave heard a noisy battle and 



hurried back with his 600-man bodyguard, Selassie had .armed his own 
troops with baskets of gold and cash. They had surrounded Balcha’s army 
and proceeded to purchase every last one of their weapons. Those who re¬ 
vised were easily intimidated. Within a few hours, Balcha’s entire force had 
been disarmed and scattered in all directions. 

Realizing his danger, Balcha decided to march south with his 600 sol¬ 
diers to regroup, but the same army that had disarmed his soldiers blocked 
his way. The other way out was to march on the capital, but Selassie had set 
a large army to defend it. Like a chess player, he had predicted Balcha’s 
moves, and had checkmated him. For the first time in his life, Balcha sur¬ 
rendered. To repent his sins of pride and ambition, he agreed to enter a 
monaster)'. 

Interpretation 

Throughout Selassie’s long reign, no one could quite figure him out. 
Ethiopians like their leaders fierce, but Selassie, who wore the front of a 
gentle, peace-loving man, lasted longer than any of them. Never angry or 
impatient, he lured his victims with sweet smiles, lulling them with charm 
and obsequiousness before he attacked. In the case of Balcha, Selassie 
played on the man’s wariness, his suspicion that the banquet was a trap— 
which in fact it was, but not the one he expected. Selassie’s way of allaying 
Balcha’s fears—letting him bring his bodyguard to the banquet, giving him 
top billing there, making him feel in control—created a thick smoke screen, 
conceaiingthe real action three miles away. 

Remember: The paranoid and wary are often the easiest to deceive. 
Win their trust in one area and you have a smoke screen that blinds their 
view in another, letting you creep up and level them with a devastating 
blow. A helpful or apparently honest gesture, or one that implies the other 
person’s superiority—these are perfect diversionary devices. 

Properly set up, the smoke screen is a weapon of great power. It en¬ 
abled the gentle Selassie to totally destroy his enemy, without firing a single 
bullet. 


Do not underestimate the power of Tafari. He creeps 
like a mo use but he has jaws like a lion . 

Balcha of Sidamo’s last words before entering the monastery 


KEYS TO POWER 

If you believe that deceivers are colorful folk who mislead with elaborate 
lies and tall tales, you are greatly mistaken. The best deceivers utilize a 
bland and inconspicuous front that calls no attention to themselves. They 
know that extravagant words and gestures immediately raise suspicion. In¬ 
stead, they envelop their mark in the familiar, the banal, the harmless. In 
Yellow Kid Weil’s dealings with Sam Geezil, the familiar was a business 
deal. In the Ethiopian case, it was Selassie’s misleading obsequiousness— 
exactly what Balcha would have expected from a weaker warlord. 



Once you have lulled your suckers* attention with the familiar, they 
will not notice the deception being perpetrated behind their backs. This 
derives from a simple truth: people can only focus on one thing at a time. It 
is really too difficult for them to imagine that the bland and harmless per¬ 
son they are dealing with is simultaneously setting up something else. The 
grayer and more uniform the smoke in your smoke screen, the better it 
conceals your intentions. In the decoy and red herring devices discussed in 
Part I, you actively distract people; in the smoke screen, you lull your vic¬ 
tims, drawing them into your web. Because it is so hypnotic, this is often 
the best way of concealing your intentions. 

The simplest form of smoke screen is facial expression. Behind a bland, 
unreadable exterior, all sorts of mayhem can be planned, without detection. 
This is a weapon that the most powerful men in history have learned to per¬ 
fect. It was said that no one could read Franklin D. Roosevelt’s face. Baron 
James Rothschild made a lifelong practice of disguising his real thoughts be¬ 
hind bland smiles and nondescript looks. Stendhal wrote of Talleyrand, 
“Never was a face less of a barometer.” Henry Kissinger would bore his op¬ 
ponents around the negotiating table to tears with his monotonous voice, 
his blank look, his endless recitations of details; then, as their eyes glazed 
over, he would suddenly hit them with a list of bold terms. Caught off¬ 
guard, they would be easily intimidated. As one poker manual explains it, 
“While playing his hand, the good player is seldom an actor. Instead he 
practices a bland behavior that minimizes readable patterns, frustrates and 
confuses opponents, permits greater concentration.” 

An adaptable concept, the smoke screen can be practiced on a num¬ 
ber of levels, all playing on the psychological principles of distraction and 
misdirection. One of the most effective smoke screens is the noble gesture. 
People want to believe apparently noble gestures are genuine, for the belief 
is pleasant. They rarely notice how deceptive these gestures can be. 

The art dealer Joseph Duveen was once confronted with a terrible prob¬ 
lem. The millionaires who had paid so dearly for Duveen’s paintings were 
running out of wall space, and with inheritance taxes getting ever higher, it 
seemed unlikely that they would keep buying. The solution was the National 
Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., which Duveen helped create in 1937 by 
getting Andrew Mellon to donate his collection to it. The National Gallery 
was the perfect front for Duveen, In one gesture, his clients avoided taxes, 
cleared wall space for new purchases, and reduced the number of paintings 
on the market, maintaining the upward pressure on their prices. All this 
while the donors created the appearance of being public benefactors. 

Another effective smoke screen is the pattern , the establishment of a se¬ 
ries of actions that seduce the victim into believing you will continue in the 
same way. The pattern plays on the psychology of anticipation: Our behav¬ 
ior conforms to patterns, or so we like to think. 

In 1878 the American robber baron Jay Gould created a company that 
began to threaten the monopoly of the telegraph company Western Union. 
The directors of Western Union decided to buy Gould’s company up— 



they had to spend a hefty sum, but they figured they had managed to rid 
themselves of an irritating competitor. A few months later, though, Gould 
was it at again, complaining he had been treated unfairly. He started up a 
second company to compete with Western Union and its new acquisition. 
The same thing happened again; Western Union bought him out to shut 
him up. Soon the pattern began for the third time, but now' Gould went for 
the jugular: He suddenly staged a bloody takeover struggle and managed 
to gain complete control of Western Union. He had established a pattern 
that had tricked die company’s directors into thinking his goal was to be 
bought out at a handsome rate. Once they paid him off, they relaxed and 
failed to notice that he was actually playing for higher stakes. The pattern is 
powerful in that it deceives the other person into expecting the opposite of 
what you are really doing. 

Another psychological weakness on which to construct a smoke screen 
is the tendency to mistake appearances for reality'—the feeling that if some 
one seems to belong to your group, their belonging must be real. This habit 
makes the seamless blend a very effective front. The trick is simple: You sim¬ 
ply blend in with those around you. The better you blend, the less suspi¬ 
cious you become. During the Cold War of the 1950s and ’60s, as is now 
notorious, a slew of British civil servants passed secrets to the Soviets. They 
went undetected for years because they were apparently decent chaps, had 
gone to all the right schools, and fit the old-boy network perfectly. Blend¬ 
ing in is the perfect smoke screen for spying. The better you do it, the bet¬ 
ter you can conceal your intentions. 

Remember: It takes patience and humility to dull your brilliant colors, 
to put on the mask of the inconspicuous. Do not despair at having to wear 
such a bland mask—it is often your unreadability that draws people to you 
and makes you appear a person of power. 


Image: A Sheep’s Skin. 

A sheep never marauds, 
a sheep never deceives, 
a sheep is magnificently 
dumb and docile. With a 
sheepskin on his back, 
a fox can pass right 
into the chicken coop. 

Authority: Have you ever heard of a skillful general, who intends to 
surprise a citadel, announcing his plan to his enemy? Conceal your 
purpose and hide your progress; do not disclose the extent of your 
designs until they cannot be opposed, until the combat is over. Win 
the victory before you declare the war. In a w r ord, imitate those war¬ 
like people whose designs are not known except by the ravaged coun¬ 
try through which they have passed. (Ninon de Lenclos, 1623-1706} 



REVERSAL 

No smoke screen, red herring, false sincerity, or any other diversionary de¬ 
vice will succeed in concealing your intentions if you already have an es¬ 
tablished reputation for deception. And as you get older and achieve 
success, it often becomes increasingly difficult to disguise your cunning. 
Everyone knows you practice deception; persist in playing naive and you 
run the risk of seeming the rankest hypocrite, which will severely limit 
your room to maneuver. In such cases it is better to own up, to appear the 
honest rogue, or, better, the repentant rogue. Not only will you be admired 
for your frankness, but, most wonderful and strange of all, you will be able 
to continue your stratagems. 

As P. T. Bamum, the nineteenth-century king of humbuggery, grew 
older, he learned to embrace his reputation as a grand deceiver. At one 
point he organized a buffalo hunt in New Jersey, complete with Indians 
and a few imported buffalo. He publicized the hunt as genuine, but it came 
off as so completely fake that the crowd, instead of getting angry and ask¬ 
ing for their money back, was greatly amused. They knew Bamum pulled 
tricks all the time; that was the secret of his success, and they loved him for 
it. Learning a lesson from this affair, Bamum stopped concealing all of his 
devices, even revealing his deceptions in a tell-all autobiography. As 
Kierkegaard wrote, “The world wants to be deceived.” 

Finally, although it is wiser to divert attention from your purposes by 
presenting a bland, familiar exterior, there are times when the colorful, 
conspicuous gesture is the right diversionary tactic. The great charlatan 
mountebanks of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Europe used humor 
and entertainment to deceive their audiences. Dazzled by a great show, the 
public would not notice the charlatans’ real intentions. Thus the star charla¬ 
tan himself would appear in town in a night-black coach drawn by black 
horses. Clowns, tightrope walkers, and star entertainers would accompany 
him, pulling people in to his demonstrations of elixirs and quack potions. 
The charlatan made entertainment seem like the business of the day; the 
business of the day was actually the sale of the elixirs and quack potions. 

Spectacle and entertainment, clearly, are excellent devices to conceal 
your intentions, but they cannot be used indefinitely. The public grows 
tired and suspicious, and eventually catches on to the trick. And indeed the 
charlatans had to move quickly from town to town, before word spread 
that the potions were useless and the entertainment a trick. Powerful peo¬ 
ple with bland exteriors, on the other hand—the Talleyrands, the Roth¬ 
schilds, the Selassies—can practice their deceptions in the same place 
throughout their lifetimes. Their act never wears thin, and rarely causes 
suspicion. The colorful smoke screen should be used cautiously, then, and 
only when the occasion is right. 



LAW 



ALWAYS SAY LESS 
THAN NECESSARY 


JUDGMENT 

When you are trying to impress people with words, the 
more you say, the more common you appear, and the less 
in control Even if you are saying something banal, it will 
seem original if you make it vague, open-ended , and 
sphinxlike. Powerful people impress and intimidate by 
saying less . The more you say, the more likely you are to 
say something foolish. 



Down on his luck, [the 
screen writer} Michael 
Arlen went to New 
York in 1944. To drown 
his sorrows he paid a 
visit to the famous 
restaurant “21.” In the 
lobby, he ran into Sam 
Goldwyn, who offered 
the somewhat impracti¬ 
cal advice that he 
should buy racehorses. 

At the bar Arlen met 
Louis 8. Mayer ; an old 
acquaintance, who 
asked him what were 
his plans for the future. 
“I was just talking to 
Sam Goldwyn ...” 
began Arlen. "How 
much did he offer 
you?” interrupted 
Mayer. "Not enough, ” 
he replied evasively. 
“ Would you take fifteen 
thousand for thirty 
weeks? ” asked Mayer. 
No hesitation this time. 
“Yes. ” said Arlen. 

THE LITTLE, BROWN 
BOOK OE ANECDOTES. 

Clifton Fa dim an, 
Ed., 1985 


One oft-told tale about 
Kissinger... 
involved a report that 
Winston Lord had 
worked on for days. 

After giving it to 
Kissinger, he got it 
back with the notation, 
“Is this the best you 
can do?” Lord rewrote 
and polished and 
finally resubmitted it; 
back it came, with the 
same curt question. 
After redrafting it one 
more time—and once 
again getting the same 


TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

Gnaeus Marcius, also known as Coriolanus, was a great military hero of 
ancient Rome. In the first half of the fifth century B.C. he won many impor¬ 
tant battles, saving the city from calamity time and time again. Because he 
spent most of his time on the battlefield, few Romans knew him personally, 
making him something of a legendary figure. 

in 454 B.C., Coriolanus decided it was time to exploit his reputation 
and enter politics. He stood for election to the high rank of consul. Candi¬ 
dates for this position traditionally made a public address early in the race, 
and when Coriolanus came before the people, he began by displaying the 
dozens of scars he had accumulated over seventeen years of fighting for 
Rome. Few in the crowd really heard the lengthy speech that followed; 
those scars, proof of his valor and patriotism, moved the people to tears. 
Coriolanus’s election seemed certain. 

When the polling day arrived, however, Coriolanus made an entry 
into the forum escorted by the entire senate and by the city’s patricians, the 
aristocracy. The common people who saw this were disturbed by such a 
blustering show of confidence on election day. 

And then Coriolanus spoke again, mostly addressing the wealthy citi¬ 
zens who had accompanied him. His words were arrogant and insolent. 
Claiming certain victory in the vote, he boasted of his battlefield exploits, 
made sour jokes that appealed only to the patricians, voiced angry accusa¬ 
tions against his opponents, and speculated on the riches he would bring to 
Rome. This time the people listened: They had not realized that this leg¬ 
endary soldier was also a common braggart. 

News of Coriolanus’s second speech spread quickly through Rome, 
and the people turned out in great numbers to make sure he was not 
elected. Defeated, Coriolanus returned to the battlefield, bitter and vowing 
revenge on the common folk who had voted against him. Some weeks later 
a large shipment of grain arrived in Rome. The senate was ready to distrib¬ 
ute this food to the people, for free, but just as they were preparing to vote 
on the question Coriolanus appeared on die scene and took the senate 
floor. The distribution, he argued, would have a harmful effect on the city 
as a whole. Several senators appeared won over, and the vote on the distri¬ 
bution fell into doubt. Coriolanus did not stop there: He went on to con¬ 
demn the concept of democracy itself. He advocated getting rid of the 
people’s representatives—the tribunes—and turning over the governing of 
the city to the patricians. 

When word of Coriolanus’s latest speech reached the people, their 
anger knew no bounds. The tribunes were sent to the senate to demand 
that Coriolanus appear before them. He refused. Riots broke out all over 
the city. The senate, fearing the people’s wrath, finally voted in favor of the 
grain distribution. The tribunes were appeased, but the people still de¬ 
manded that Coriolanus speak to diem and apologize. If he repented, and 
agreed to keep his opinions to himself, he would be allowed to return to 
the battlefield. 

Coriolanus did appear one last time before the people, who listened to 


32 LAW 4 



him in rapt silence. He started slowly and softly, but as the speech went on, 
he became more and more blunt Yet again he hurled insults! His tone was 
arrogant, his expression disdainful. The more he spoke, the angrier the 
people became. Finally they shouted him down and silenced him. 

The tribunes conferred, condemned Coriolanus to death, and ordered 
the magistrates to take him at once to the top of the Tarpeian rock and 
throw him over. The delighted crowd seconded the decision. The patri¬ 
cians, however, managed to intervene, and the sentence was commuted to 
a lifelong banishment. When the people found out that Rome's great mili 
tary hero would never return to the city, they celebrated in the streets. In 
fact no one had ever seen such a celebration, not even after the defeat of a 
foreign enemy. 

Interpretation 

Before his entrance into politics, die name of Coriolanus evoked awe. 

His battlefield accomplishments showed him as a man of great brav¬ 
ery. Since the citizens knew little about him, all kinds of legends became at¬ 
tached to his name. The moment he appeared before the Roman citizens, 
however, and spoke his mind, all that grandeur and mystery vanished. He 
bragged and blustered like a common soldier. He insulted and slandered 
people, as if be felt threatened and insecure. Suddenly he was not at all 
what the people had imagined. The discrepancy between the legend and 
the reality proved immensely disappointing to those who wanted to be¬ 
lieve in their hero. The more Coriolanus said, the less powerful he ap¬ 
peared—a person who cannot control his words shows that he cannot 
control himself, and is unworthy of respect 

Had Coriolanus said less, the people would never have had cause to 
be offended by him, would never have known his true feelings. He would 
have maintained his powerful aura, would certainly have been elected con¬ 
sul, and would have been able to accomplish his antidemocratic goals. But 
the human tongue is a beast that few can master. It strains constantly to 
break out of its cage, and if it is not tamed, it will run wild and cause you 
grief. Power cannot accrue to those who squander their treasure of words. 

Oysters open completely when the moon is full; and when the crab sees one 
it throws a piece of stone or seaweed into it and the oyster cannot close 
again so that it sel ves the crab for meat. Such is the fate of him who opens 
his mouth too much and thereby puts himself at the mercy of the listener. 

Leonardo da Vinci, 1452—1519 


question from 
Kissinger- Lord 
snapped, “Damn it, yes. 
it’s the best 1 can do, ” 
To which Kissinger 
replied: “Fine, then / 
guess i’ll read it this 
time ." 

KISSINGER. 

Walter Isaacson, 
1992 


The King [Louis XIV / 
maintains the most 
impenetrable secrecy 
about affairs of State, 
The ministers attend 
council meetings, but 
he confides his plans to 
them only when he has 
reflected at length upon 
them and has come to 
a definite decision. 

/ wish you might see 
the King. His expres¬ 
sion is inscrutable; his 
eyes like those of a fox. 
He never discusses 
State affairs except with 
his ministers in Coun¬ 
cil. When he speaks to 
courtiers he refers only 
to their respective 
prerogatives or duties. 
Even the. most frivo¬ 
lous of his utterances 
has the air of being the 
pronouncement of an 
oracle. 

Primi Visconti. 

QUOTED IN 
LOUIS XIV. 

Louis Bertrand. 

1928 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

In the court of Louis XIV, nobles and ministers would spend days and 
nights debating issues of state. They would confer, argue, make and break 
alliances, and argue again, until finally the critical moment arrived: Two of 
them would be chosen to represent the different sides to Louis himself, 
who would decide what should be done. After these persons were chosen, 


LAW 4 33 



Undutifiil words of a 
subject do often take 
deeper root than the 
memory of Hi deeds.... 
The late Earl of Essex 
told Queen Elizabeth 
that her conditions 
were as crooked as her 
carcass; but it cost him 
his head, which his 
insurrection had not 
cost hint but for that 
speech; 

Sir Waiter Raleigh, 
1554-1618 


everyone would argue some more: How should the issues be phrased? 
What would appeal to Louis, what would annoy him? At what time of day 
should the representatives approach him, and in what part of the Versailles 
palace? What expression should they have on their faces? 

Finally, after all this was settled, the fateful moment would finally ar¬ 
rive. The two men would approach Louis—always a delicate matter—and 
when they finally had his ear, they would talk about the issue at hand, 
spelling out the options in detail. 

Louis would listen in silence, a most enigmatic look on his face. Fi¬ 
nally, when each had finished his presentation and had asked for the king’s 
opinion, he would look at them both and say, “I shall see.” Then he would 
walk away. 

The ministers and courtiers would never hear another word on this 
subject from the king-—they would simply see the result, weeks later, when 
he would come to a decision and act. He would never bother to consult 
them on the matter again. 

Interpretation 

Louis XIV was a man of very few words. His most famous remark is 
“L’etat, c’est moi” ( a I am the state”); nothing could be more pithy yet more 
eloquent His infamous “I shall see” was one of several extremely short 
phrases that he would apply to all manner of requests. 

Louis was not always this way; as a young man he was known for talk¬ 
ing at length, delighting in his own eloquence. His later taciturnity was self- 
imposed, an act, a mask he used to keep everybody below him off-balance. 
No one knew exactly where he stood, or could predict his reactions. No 
one could try to deceive him by saying what they thought he wanted to 
hear, because no one knew what he wanted to hear. As they talked on and 
on to the silent Louis, they revealed more and more about themselves, in¬ 
formation he would later use against them to great effect. 

In the end, Louis’s silence kept those around him terrified and under 
his thumb. It was one of the foundations of his power. As Saint-Simon 
wrote, *No one knew as well as he how to sell his words, his smile, even his 
glances. Everything in him was valuable because he created differences, 
and his majesty was enhanced by the sparseness of his words.” 

It is even more damaging for a minister to say foolish things than to do them. 

Cardinal de Rett, 1613 1679 


KEYS TO POWER 

Power is in many ways a game of appearances, and when you say less than 
necessary, you inevitably appear greater and more powerful than you are. 
Your silence will make other people uncomfortable. Humans are machines 
of interpretation and explanation; they have to know what you are think¬ 
ing, When you carefully control what you reveal, they cannot pierce your 
intentions or your meaning. 


H 


LAW 4 




Your short answers and silences will put them on the defensive, and 
they will jump in, nervously filling the silence with all kinds of comments 
that will reveal valuable information about them and their weaknesses. 
They will leave a meeting with you feeling as if they had been robbed, and 
they will go home and ponder your every word. This extra attention to 
your brief comments will only add to your power. 

Saying less than necessary is not for kings and statesmen only. In most 
areas of life, the less you say, the more profound and mysterious you ap¬ 
pear. As a young man, the artist Andy Warhol had the revelation that it was 
generally impossible to get people to do what you wanted them to do by 
talking to them. They would turn against you, subvert your wishes, disobey 
you out of sheer perversity. He once told a friend, “I learned that you actu¬ 
ally have more power when you shut up.” 

In his later life Warhol employed this strategy with great success. His 
interviews were exercises in oracular speech: He would say something 
vague and ambiguous, and the interviewer would twist in circles trying to 
figure it out, imagining there was something profound behind his often 
meaningless phrases. Warhol rarely talked about his work; he let others do 
the interpreting. He claimed to have learned this technique from that mas¬ 
ter of enigma Marcel Duchamp, another twentieth-century artist who real¬ 
ized early on that the less he said about his work, the more people talked 
about it. And the more they talked, the more valuable his work became. 

By saying less than necessary you create the appearance of meaning 
and power. Also, the less you say, the less risk you run of saying something 
foolish, even dangerous. In 1825 a new czar, Nicholas I, ascended the 
throne of Russia. A rebellion immediately broke out, led by liberals de¬ 
manding that the country modernize—that its industries and civil struc¬ 
tures catch up with the rest of Europe. Brutally crushing this rebellion (the 
Decembrist Uprising), Nicholas I sentenced one of its leaders, Kondraty 
Ryleyev, to death. On the day of the execution Ryleyev stood on the gal¬ 
lows, the noose around his neck The trapdoor opened—but as Ryleyev 
dangled, the rope broke, dashing him to the ground. At the time, events 
like this were considered signs of providence or heavenly will, and a man 
saved from execution this way was usually pardoned. As Ryleyev got to his 
feet, bruised and dirtied but believing his neck had been saved, he called 
out to the crowd, “You see, in Russia they don’t know how to do anything 
properly, not even how to make rope!” 

A messenger immediately went to the Winter Palace with news of the 
failed hanging. Vexed by this disappointing turnabout, Nicholas I never¬ 
theless began to sign the pardon. But then: “Did Ryleyev say anything after 
this miracle?” the czar asked the messenger. “Sire,” the messenger replied, 
“he said that in Russia they don’t even know how to make rope.” 

“In that case,” said the Czar, “let us prove the contrary,” and he tore 
up the pardon. The next day Ryleyev was hanged again. This time the 
rope did not break. 

Learn the lesson: Once die words are out, you cannot take them back. 
Keep them under control. Be particularly careful with sarcasm: The mo- 



mentary satisfaction you gain with your biting words will be outweighed by 
the price you pay. 


Image: 

The Oracle at Delphi. 

When visitors consulted the 
Oracle, the priestess would utter 
a few enigmatic words that seemed 
full of meaning and import. No one 
disobeyed the words of the Oracle— 
they held power over life and death. 


Authority: Never start moving your own lips and teeth before 
the subordinates do. The longer I keep quiet, the sooner others 
move their lips and teeth. As they move their lips and teeth, l 
can thereby understand their real intentions.... If the sovereign 
is not mysterious, the ministers will find opportunity to take 
and take. (Han-fei-tzu, Chinese philosopher, third century B.C.) 


REVERSAL 

There are times when it is unwise to be silent. Silence can arouse suspicion 
and even insecurity, especially in your superiors; a vague or ambiguous 
comment can open you up to interpretations you had not bargained for. Si¬ 
lence and saying less than necessary must be practiced with caution, then, 
and in the right situations. It is occasionally wiser to imitate the court jester, 
who plays the fool but knows he is smarter than the king. He talks and talks 
and entertains, and no one suspects that he is more than just a fool. 

Also, words can sometimes act as a kind of smoke screen for any de¬ 
ception you might practice. By bending your listener’s ear with talk, you 
can distract and mesmerize them; the more you talk, in fact, the less suspi¬ 
cious of you they become. The verbose are not perceived as sly and ma¬ 
nipulative but as helpless and unsophisticated. This is the reverse of the 
silent policy employed by the powerful: By talking more, and making 
yourself appear weaker and less intelligent than your mark, you can prac¬ 
tice deception with greater ease. 



LAW 



SO MUCH DEPENDS ON 
REPUTATION—GUARD IT 
WITH YOUR LIFE 

JUDGMENT 

Reputation is the cornerstone of power. Through reputa¬ 
tion alone you can intimidate and win; once it slips, 
however, you aw vulnerable ; and will be attacked on all 
sides. Make your reputation unassailable. Always be 
alert to potential attacks and thwart them before they 
happen. Meanwhile, learn to destroy your enemies by 
opening hales in their own reputations. Then stand 
aside and let public opinion hang them , 



I llK AMMAI.W 
s'| lUCKKN W ITH TIM 
Pi.\H !■: 

A frightful epidemic 
sent 

To earth by Heaven 
intent to vent 
Its fury on a sinful 
world, to cull 
It by its rightful name, 
the pestilence, 
Tha t A cheron-filling 
vial of virulence 
Had fallen on every 
animal. 

Not all were dead, hut 
all lay near to dying. 
And none was any 
longer trying 
To find new fuel to feed 
life s flickering fires. 
No foods excited their 
desires; 
No more did wolves 
and foxes rove 
In search o f harmless , 
helpless prey; 
And dove would not 
consort with dove. 
For love and joy had 
flown away. 
The Lion assumed the 
chair to say: “ Dear 
friends, 
/ doubt not it's for 
heaven's high ends 
That on us sinners woe 
must fall. 
Let him of us who's 
sinned the most 
Fall victim to the 
avenging heavenly 
host. 

And may he win salva¬ 
tion for us all; 
For history teaches us 
that in these crises 
We must make 
sacrifices. 
Undeceived and stern - 
eyed, let's inspect 
Our conscience. As / 
recollect. 
To put my greedy 
appetite to sleep , 
I've banqueted on 


38 LAW 5 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I 

During China’s War of the Three Kingdoms (a.d. 207-265), the great gen¬ 
eral Chuko Liang, leading the forces of the Shu Kingdom, dispatched his 
vast army to a distant camp while he rested in a small town with a handful 
of soldiers. Suddenly sentinels hurried in with the alarming news that an 
enemy force of over 150,000 troops under Sima Yi was approaching. With 
only a hundred men to defend him, Chuko Liang’s situation was hopeless. 
The enemy would finally capture this renowned leader. 

Without lamenting his fate, or wasting time trying to figure out how he 
had been caught, Liang ordered his troops to take down their flags, throw 
open the city gates, and hide. He himself then took a seat on the most visi¬ 
ble part of the city’s wall, wearing a Taoist robe. He lit some incense, 
strummed his lute, and began to chant. Minutes later he could see the vast 
enemy army approaching, an endless phalanx of soldiers. Pretending not 
to notice them, he continued to sing and play the lute. 

Soon the army stood at the town gates. At its head was Sima Yi, who 
instantly recognized the man on the wall. 

Even so, as his soldiers itched to enter the unguarded town through its 
open gates, Sima Yi hesitated, held them back, and studied Liang on the 
wall. Then, he ordered an immediate and speedy retreat. 

Interpretation 

Chuko Liang was commonly known as the “Sleeping Dragon.” His ex¬ 
ploits in the War of the Three Kingdoms were legendary. Once a man 
claiming to be a disaffected enemy lieutenant came to his camp, offering 
help and information. Liang instantly recognized the situation as a setup; 
this man was a false deserter, and should be beheaded. At the last minute, 
though, as the ax was about to fall, Liang stopped the execution and of¬ 
fered to spare the man’s life if he agreed to become a double agent. Grate¬ 
ful and terrified, the man agreed, and began supplying false information to 
the enemy. Liang won battle after battle. 

On another occasion Liang stole a military' seal and created false docu¬ 
ments dispatching his enemy’s troops to distant locations. Once the troops 
had dispersed, he was able to capture three cities, so that he controlled an 
entire corridor of the enemy’s kingdom. He also once tricked the enemy 
into believing one of its best generals was a traitor, forcing the man to es¬ 
cape and join forces with Liang. The Sleeping Dragon carefully cultivated 
his reputation of being the cleverest man in China, one who always had a 
trick up his sleeve. As powerful- as any weapon, this reputation struck fear 
into his enemy. 

Sima Yi had fought against Chuko Liang dozens of times and knew 
him well. When he came on the empty city, with Liang praying on the 
wall, he was stunned. The Taoist robes, the chanting, the incense—this had 
to be a game of intimidation. The man was obviously taunting him, daring 
him to walk into a trap. The game was so obvious that for one moment it 
crossed Yi’s mind that Liang actually was alone, and desperate. But so 
great was his fear of Liang that he dared not risk finding out. Such is the 



power of reputation. It can put a vast army on the defensive, even force 
them into retreat, without a single arrow being fired. 

For, as Cicero says , even those who argue against fame still want the books they 
write against it to bear their name in the title and hope to become famous for 
despising it. Everything else is subject to barter: we will let our friends have 
our goods and our lives if need be; but a case of sharing our fame and 
making someone else the gift of our reputation is hardly to be found. 

M n nta igne, 15.3.3— 1 5 92 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II 

In 1S41 the young P. T. Bamum, trying to establish his reputation as Amer¬ 
ica’s premier showman, decided to purchase the American Museum in 
Manhattan and turn it into a collection of curiosities that would secure his 
fame. The problem was that he had no money. The museum’s asking price 
was $15,000, but Bamum was able to put together a proposal that appealed 
to the institution’s owners even though it replaced cash up front with 
dozens of guarantees and references. The owners came to a verbal agree¬ 
ment with Bamum, but at the last minute, the principal partner changed 
his mind, and the museum and its collection were sold to the directors of 
Peale’s Museum. Bamum was infuriated, but the partner explained that 
business was business—the museum had been sold to Peale’s because 
Peale’s had a reputation and Bamum had none. 

Bamum immediately decided that if he had no reputation to bank on, 
his only recourse was to min the reputation of Peale’s. Accordingly he 
launched a letter-writing campaign in the newspapers, calling the owners a 
bunch of “broken-down bank directors” who had no idea how to ran a mu¬ 
seum or entertain people. He warned the public against buying Peale’s 
stock, since the business’s purchase of another museum would invariably 
spread its resources thin. The campaign was effective, the stock plum¬ 
meted, and with no more confidence in Peale’s track record and reputa¬ 
tion, the owners of the American Museum reneged on their deal and sold 
the whole thing to Bamum. 

It took years for Peale’s to recover, and they never forgot what Bar- 
num had done. Mr. Peale himself decided to attack Bamum by building a 
reputation for “high-brow entertainment,” promoting his museum’s pro¬ 
grams as more scientific than those of his vulgar competitor. Mesmerism 
(hypnotism) was one of Peale’s “scientific” attractions, and for a while it 
drew big crowds and was quite successful. To fight back, Bamum decided 
to attack Peale’s reputation yet again. 

Bamum organized a rival mesmeric performance in which he himself 
apparently put a little girl into a trance. Once she seemed to have fallen 
deeply under, he tried to hypnotize members of the audience—but no mat¬ 
ter how hard he tried, none of the spectators fell under his spell, and many 
of them began to laugh. A frustrated Bamum finally announced that to 
prove the little girl’s trance was real, he would cut off one of her fingers 


many a sheep 
Who’d injured me in 
no respect, 

And even in my time 
been known to try 
Shepherd pie. 

If need be, then. I'll die. 
Yet I suspect 
That others also ought 
to own their sins. 

It’s only fair that all 
should do their best 
To single out the 
guiltiest. ” 

“ Sire , you 're too good 
a king, ” the. Fox begins; 
“Such scruples are too 
delicate. My word, 

To eat sheep, that 
profane and vulgar 
herd, 

That's sin? Nay , Sire, 
enough for such a crew 
To be devoured by 
such as you; 

While of the shepherds 
we may say 
That they deserved the 
worst they got, 

Theirs being the lot 
that over us beasts plot 
A flimsy dream- 
begotten sway. ’’ 

Thus spake the Fox, 
and toady cheers rose 
high, 

While none dared cast 
too cold an eye 
On Tiger’s, Bear’s, and 
other eminences' 

Most unpardonable 
offences. 

Each, of never mind 
what currish breed. 

Was really a saint, they 
all agreed. 

Then came the Ass, to 
say: “I do recall 
How once. / crossed an 
abbey-mead 
Where hunger, grass in 
plenty, and withal, 

/ have no doubt, some 
imp of greed, 

Assailed me, and l 
shaved a tongue's- 
breadth wide 
Where frankly I'd no 
right to any grass. ” 


LAW 5 


39 



AII forth with fell fu 1.1 
cry upon the Ass: 
A Wolf of some book- 
learning testified 
That that curst beast 
must suffer their 
despite, 
That gullskinned 
author o f their piteous 
plight. 

They judged him fit 
for nought but 
gallows-bait: 
How vile, another’s 
grass to sequestrate! 
His death alone could 
expiate 

A crime so heinous, as 
full well he learns. 
The court, as you're of 
great or poor estate , 
Will paint you either 
white or black by turns. 

THE BEST FABLES 
OF LA FONTAINE, 

Jkan de La Fontaine, 
1621-1695 


without her noticing. But as he sharpened the knife, the little girl’s eyes 
popped open and she ran away, to the audience’s delight. He repeated this 
and other parodies for several weeks. Soon no one could take Peale’s show 
seriously, and attendance went way down. Within a few weeks, the show 
closed. Over the next few years Bamum established a reputation for audac¬ 
ity and consummate showmanship that lasted his whole life. Peale’s reputa¬ 
tion, on the other hand, never recovered. 

Interpretation 

Bamum used two different tactics to min Peale’s reputation. The first was 
simple: He sowed doubts about the museum’s stability and solvency. 
Doubt is a powerful weapon: Once you let it out of the bag with insidious 
rumors, your opponents are in a horrible dilemma. On the one hand they 
can deny the rumors, even prove that you have slandered them. But a 
layer of suspicion will remain: Why are they defending themselves so des¬ 
perately? Maybe the rumor has some truth to it? If, on the other hand, they 
take the high road and ignore you, the doubts, unrefiited, will be even 
stronger. If done correctly, the sowing of rumors can so infuriate and unset¬ 
tle your rivals that in defending themselves they will make numerous mis¬ 
takes. This is the perfect weapon for those who have no reputation of their 
own to work from. 

Once Bamum did have a reputation of his own, he used the second, 
gentler tactic, the fake hypnotism demonstration: He ridiculed his rivals’ 
reputation. This too was extremely successful. Once you have a solid base 
of respect, ridiculing your opponent both puts him on the defensive and 
draws more attention to you, enhancing your own reputation. Outright 
slander and insult are too strong at this point; they are ugly, and may hurt 
you more than help you. But gentle barbs and mockery suggest that you 
have a strong enough sense of your own worth to enjoy a good laugh at 
your rival’s expense. A humorous front can make you out as a harmless en¬ 
tertainer while poking holes in the reputation of your rival. 

It is easier to cope with a bad conscience than with a bad reputation. 

Friedrich Nietzsche, 1844—1900 


KEYS TO POWER 

The people around us, even our closest friends, will always to some extent 
remain mysterious and unfathomable. Their characters have secret recesses 
that they never reveal. The unknowableness of other people could prove 
disturbing if we thought about it long enough, since it would make it im¬ 
possible for us really to judge other people. So we prefer to ignore this fact, 
and to judge people on their appearances, on what is most visible to our 
eyes—clothes, gestures, words, actions. In the social realm, appearances are 
the barometer of almost all of our judgments, and you must never be mis¬ 
led into believing otherwise. One false slip, one awkward or sudden change 
in your appearance, can prove disastrous. 


40 LAW 5 



This is the reason for the supreme importance of making and main¬ 
taining a reputation that is of your own creation. 

That reputation will protect you in the dangerous game of appear¬ 
ances, distracting the probing eyes of others from knowing what you are 
really like, and giving you a degree of control over how the world judges 
you—a powerful position to be in. Reputation has a power like magic: 
With one stroke of its wand, it can double your strength. It can also send 
people scurrying away from you. Whether the exact same deeds appear 
brilliant or dreadful can depend entirely on the reputation of the doer. 

In the ancient Chinese court of the Wei kingdom there was a man 
named Mi Tzu-hsia who had a reputation for supreme civility and gracious¬ 
ness. He became the ruler’s favorite. It was a law in Wei that “whoever 
rides secretly in the ruler’s coach shall have his feet cut off,” but when Mi 
Tzu-hsia 5 s mother fell ill, he used the royal coach to visit her, pretending 
that the ruler had given him permission. When the ruler found out, he said, 
“How dutiful is Mi Tzu-hsia! For his mother’s sake he even forgot that he 
was committing a crime making him liable to lose his feet!” 

Another time the two of them took a stroll in an orchard. Mi Tzu-hsia 
began eating a peach that he could not finish, and he gave the ruler the 
other half to eat. The ruler remarked, “You love me so much that you would 
even forget your own saliva taste and let me eat the rest of the peach!” 

Later, however, envious fellow courtiers, spreading word that Mi Tzu- 
hsia was actually devious and arrogant, succeeded in damaging his reputa¬ 
tion; the ruler came to see his actions in a new light “This fellow once rode 
in my coach under pretense of my order,” he told the courtiers angrily, 
“and another time he gave me a half-eaten peach.” For the same actions 
that had charmed the ruler when he was the favorite, Mi Tzu-hsia now had 
to suffer the penalties. The fate of his feet depended solely on the strength 
of his reputation. 

In the beginning, you must work to establish a reputation for one out¬ 
standing quality, whether generosity or honesty or cunning. This quality 
sets you apart and gets other people to talk about you. You then make your 
reputation known to as many people as possible (subtly, though; take care 
to build slowly, and with a firm foundation), and watch as it spreads like 
wildfire. 

A solid reputation increases your presence and exaggerates your 
strengths without your having to spend much energy. It can also create an 
aura around you that will instill respect, even fear. In the fighting in the 
North African desert during World War II, the German general Erwin 
Rommel had a reputation for cunning and for deceptive maneuvering that 
struck terror into everyone who faced him. Even when his forces were de¬ 
pleted, and when British tanks outnumbered his by five to one, entire cities 
would be evacuated at the news of his approach. 

As they say, your reputation inevitably precedes you, and if it inspires 
respect, a lot of your work is done for you before you arrive on the scene, 
or utter a single word. 

Your success seems destined by your past triumphs. Much of the sue- 



cess of Henry Kissinger’s shuttle diplomacy rested on his reputation for 
ironing out differences; no one wanted to be seen as so unreasonable that 
Kissinger could not sway him. A peace treaty seemed a fait accompli as 
soon as Kissinger’s name became involved in the negotiations. 

Make your reputation simple and base it on one sterling quality. This 
single quality—efficiency, say, or seductiveness—becomes a kind of calling 
card that announces your presence and places others under a spell. A repu¬ 
tation for honesty will allow you to practice all manner of deception. 
Casanova used his reputation as a great seducer to pave the way for his fu¬ 
ture conquests; women who had heard of his powers became immensely 
curious, and wanted to discover for themselves what had made him so ro¬ 
mantically successful. 

Perhaps you have already stained your reputation, so that you are pre¬ 
vented from establishing a new one. In such cases it is wise to associate 
with someone whose image counteracts your own, using their good name 
to whitewash and elevate yours. It is hard, for example, to erase a reputa¬ 
tion for dishonesty by yourself; but a paragon of honesty can help. When 
P. T. Bamum wanted to clean up a reputation for promoting vulgar enter¬ 
tainment, he brought the singer Jenny Lind over from Europe. She had a 
stellar, high-class reputation, and the American tour Bamum sponsored for 
her gready enhanced his own image. Similarly the great robber barons of 
nineteenth-century America were long unable to rid themselves of a repu¬ 
tation for cruelty and mean-spiritedness. Only when they began collecting 
art, so that the names of Morgan and Frick became permanently associated 
with those of da Vinci and Rembrandt, were they able to soften their un¬ 
pleasant image. 

Reputation is a treasure to be carefully collected and hoarded. Espe¬ 
cially when you are first establishing it, you must protect it strictly, antici¬ 
pating all attacks on it. Once it is solid, do not let yourself get angry or 
defensive at the slanderous comments of your enemies—that reveals inse¬ 
curity, not confidence in your reputation. Take the high road instead, and 
never appear desperate in your self-defense. On the other hand, an attack 
on another man’s reputation is a potent weapon, particularly when you 
have less power than he does. He has much more to lose in such a battle, 
and your own thus-far-smail reputation gives him a small target when he 
tries to return your fire. Bamum used such campaigns to great effect in his 
early career. But this tactic must be practiced with skill; you must not seem 
to engage in petty vengeance. If you do not break your enemy’s reputation 
cleverly, you will inadvertently min your own. 

Thomas Edison, considered the inventor who harnessed electricity, 
believed that a workable system would have to be based on direct cur¬ 
rent (DC). When the Serbian scientist Nikola Tesla appeared to have suc¬ 
ceeded in creating a system based on alternating current (AC), Edison was 
furious. He determined to ruin Tesla’s reputation, by making the public be¬ 
lieve that the AC system was inherently unsafe, and Tesla irresponsible in 
promoting it. 

To this end he captured all kinds of household pets and electrocuted 



them to death with an AC current. When this w r asn’t enough, in 1890 he got 
New York State prison authorities to organize the world’s first execution by 
electrocution, using an AC current. But Edison’s electrocution experiments 
had all been with small creatures; the charge was too weak, and the man 
was only half killed. In perhaps the country’s crudest state-authorized exe¬ 
cution, the procedure had to be repeated. It was an awful spectacle. 

Although, in the long run, it is Edison’s name that has survived, at the 
time his campaign damaged his own reputation more than Tesla’s. He 
backed off. The lesson is simple—never go too far in attacks like these, for 
that will draw more attention to your own vengefulness than to the person 
you are slandering. When your own reputation is solid, use subtler tactics, 
such as satire and ridicule, to weaken your opponent while making you out 
as a charming rogue. The mighty lion toys with the mouse that crosses his 
path—any other reaction would mar his fearsome reputation. 


Image: 

A Mine Full of 
Diamonds and Rubies. 

You dug for it, you found it, 
and your wealth is now assured. 
Guard it with your life. Robbers and thieves 
will appear from all sides. Never take your wealth 
for granted, and constantly renew' it—time 
will diminish the jewels’ luster, 
and bury them from sight. 


Authority: Therefore I should wish our courtier to bolster up his inherent 
worth with skill and cunning, and ensure that whenever he has to go where 
he is a stranger, he is preceded by a good reputation. . . . For the fame 
which appears to rest on the opinions of many fosters a certain unshak¬ 
able belief in a man’s worth which is then easily strengthened in minds 
already thus disposed and prepared. (Baldassare Castiglione, 1478-1529) 


REVERSAL 

There is no possible Reversal. Reputation is critical; there are no excep¬ 
tions to this law'. Perhaps, not caring what others think of you, you gain a 
reputation for insolence and arrogance, but that can be a valuable image in 
itself—Oscar Wilde used it to great advantage. Since we must live in soci¬ 
ety and must depend on the opinions of others, there is nothing to be 
gained by neglecting your reputation. By not caring how you are per¬ 
ceived, you let others decide this for you. Be the master of your fate, and 
also of your reputation. 




LAW 


6 

COURT ATTENTION 
AT ALL COST 


JUDGMENT 

Everything is judged by its appearance; what is unseen 
counts for nothing. Never let yourself get lost in the 
crowd , then, or buried in oblivion . Stand out Be con¬ 
spicuous, at all cost Make yourself a magnet of atten¬ 
tion by appearing larger, more colorful , more mysterious 
than the bland and timid masses. 



PART I: SURROUND YOUR NAME WITH THE 
SENSATIONAL AND SCANDALOUS 

Draw attention to yourself by creating an unforgettable, even, controversial 
image. Court scandal. Do anything to make yourself seem larger than life 
and shine more brightly than those around you . Make no distinction be¬ 
tween kinds of attention—notoriety of any sort will bring you power. Better 
to be slandered and attacked than ignored. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

P. T. Bamum, America’s premier nineteenth-century showman, started his 
career as an assistant to the owner of a circus, Aaron Turner. In 1836 the 
circus stopped in Annapolis, Maryland, for a series of performances. On 
the morning of opening day, Bamum took a stroll through town, wearing a 
new black suit People started to follow him. Someone in the gathering 
crowd shouted out that he was the Reverend Ephraim K. Avery, infamous 
as a man acquitted of the charge of murder but still believed guilty by most 
Americans. The angry mob tore off Bamum’s suit and was ready to lynch 
him. After desperate appeals, Bamum finally convinced them to follow 
him to the circus, where he could verify his identity. 

Once there, old Turner confirmed that this was all a practical joke—he 
himself had spread the rumor that Bamum was Avery. The crowd dis¬ 
persed, but Barnum, who had nearly been killed, was not amused. He 
wanted to know what could have induced his boss to play such a trick. “My 
dear Mr. Bamum,” Turner replied, “it was all for our good. Remember, all 
we need to ensure success is notoriety.” And indeed everyone in town was 
talking about the joke, and the circus was packed that night and every night 
it stayed in Annapolis. Bamum had learned a lesson he would never forget. 

Bamum’s first big venture of his own was the American Museum—a 
collection of curiosities, located in New York. One day a beggar ap¬ 
proached Bamum in the street. Instead of giving him money, Bamum de¬ 
cided to employ him. Taking him back to the museum, he gave the man 
five bricks and told him to make a slow circuit of several blocks. At certain 
points he was to lay down a brick on the sidewalk, always keeping one 
brick in hand. On the return journey he was to replace each brick on the 
street with the one he held. Meanwhile he was to remain serious of counte¬ 
nance and to answer no questions. Once back at the museum, he was to 
enter, walk around inside, then leave through the back door and make the 
same bricklaying circuit again. 

On the man’s first walk through the streets, several hundred people 
watched his mysterious movements. By his fourth circuit, onlookers 
swarmed around him, debating what he was doing. Every time he entered 
the museum he was followed by people who bought tickets to keep watch¬ 
ing him. Many of them were distracted by the museum’s collections, and 
stayed inside. By the end of the first day, the brick man had drawn over a 


tim; was i* and nil-: 

PH I NCH 

A wasp named Pin Tail 
was long in quest of 
some deed that would 
make him forever 
famous. So one day he 
entered the king's 
palace and stung the 
little prince, who was in 
bed. The prince awoke 
with loud cries. The 
king and his courtiers 
rushed in to see what 
had happened. The 
prince was yelling as 
the wasp stung him 
again and again. The 
courtiers tried to catch 
the wasp , and each in 
turn was stung. The 
whole royal household 
rushed in, the news 
soon spread, and 
people flocked to the 
palace. The city was in 
an uproar, all business 
suspended . Said the 
wasp to itself before it 
expired from its efforts, 
"A name without fame 
is like fire without 
flame. There is nothing 
like attracting notice at 
any cost. ” 

Indian fable 


LAW 6 


45 




Even when Em railed 
at, l get my (junta of 
renown. 

PlIi'I'KO AKtiTINO. 
1492-1556 


Till-: <:<H in' ARTIST 

A work that was volun¬ 
tarily presented to a 
prince was hound to 
seem in some way 
special. The artist 
himself might also try 
to attract the attention 
of the court through his 
behaviour. In Vasari’s 
judgment Sodonta was 
"well known both for 
his personal eccentrici¬ 
ties and for his reputa¬ 
tion as a good painter." 
Because Pope Leo X 
“found pleasure in 
such strange, hare¬ 
brained individuals , “ 
he. made Sodonta a 
knight , causing the 
artist to go completely 
out of his mind. Van 
Marnier found it odd 
that the products of 
Cornells KeteVs experi¬ 
ments in mouth and 
foot painting were 
bought by notable 
persons “because of 
their oddity, " yet Ketel 
was only adding a vari¬ 
ation to similar experi¬ 
ments by Titian, Vgo 
da Carpi and Palma 
G to vane, who, accord¬ 
ing to Boschirti painted 
with their fingers 
*'because they wished 
to imitate the method 
used by the Supreme 
Creator. ” Van Mande.r 


46 ; LAW 6 


thousand people into the museum. A few days later the police ordered him 
to cease and desist from his walks—the crowds were blocking traffic. The 
bricklaying stopped but thousands of New Yorkers had entered die mu¬ 
seum, and many of those had become P. T, Bamum converts. 

Bamum would put a band of musicians on a balcony overlooking the 
street, beneath a huge banner proclaiming FREE music FOR THE MILLIONS. 
What generosity. New Yorkers thought, and they flocked to hear the free 
concerts. But Bamum took pains to hire the worst musicians he could find, 
and soon after the band struck up, people would hurry to buy tickets to the 
museum, where they would be out of earshot of the band's noise, and of 
the booing of the crowd. 

One of the first oddities Bamum toured around the country was Joice 
Heth, a woman he claimed was 161 years old, and whom he advertised as a 
slave who had once been George Washington’s nurse. After several 
months the crowds began to dwindle, so Bamum sent an anonymous letter 
to the papers, claiming that Heth was a clever fraud. “Joice Heth,” he 
wrote, “is not a human being but an automaton, made up of whalebone, 
india-rubber, and numberless springs.” Those who had not bothered to see 
her before were immediately curious, and those who had already seen her 
paid to see her again, to find out whether the rumor that she was a robot 
was true. 

In 1842, Bamum purchased the carcass of what was purported to be a 
mermaid. This creature resembled a monkey with the body of a fish, but 
the head and body were perfectly joined—it was truly a wonder. After 
some research Bamum discovered that the creature had been expertly put 
together in Japan, where the hoax had caused quite a stir. 

He nevertheless planted articles in newspapers around the country 
claiming the capture of a mermaid in the Fiji Islands. He also sent the pa¬ 
pers woodcut prints of paintings showing mermaids. By the time he showed 
the specimen in his museum, a national debate had been sparked over the 
existence of these mythical creatures. A few months before Bamum’s cam¬ 
paign, no one had cared or even known about mermaids; now everyone 
was talking about them as if they were real. Crowds flocked in record num¬ 
bers to see the Fiji Mermaid, and to hear debates on the subject. 

A few years later, Bamum toured Europe with General Tom Thumb, a 
five-year-old dwarf from Connecticut whom Bamum claimed was an 
eleven-year-old English boy, and whom he had trained to do many re¬ 
markable acts. During this tour Bamum’s name attracted such attention 
that Queen Victoria, that paragon of sobriety, requested a private audience 
with him and his talented dwarf at Buckingham Palace. The English press 
may have ridiculed Bamum, but Victoria was royally entertained by him, 
and respected him ever after. 

Interpretation 

Bamum understood the fundamental truth about attracting attention: 
Once people’s eyes are on you, you have a special legitimacy. For Bamum, 



creating interest meant creating a crowd; as he later wrote, “Every crowd 
has a silver lining.” And crowds tend to act in conjunction. If one person 
stops to see your beggarman laying bricks in the street, more will do the 
same. They will gather like dust bunnies. Then, given a gentle push, they 
will enter your museum or watch your show. To create a crowd you have to 
do something different and odd. Any kind of curiosity will serve the pur¬ 
pose, for crowds are magnetically attracted by the unusual and inexplica¬ 
ble. And once you have their attention, never let it go. If it veers toward 
other people, it does so at your expense. Bamum would ruthlessly suck at¬ 
tention from his competitors, knowing what a valuable commodity it is. 

At the beginning of your rise to the top, then, spend all your energy on 
attracting attention. Most important: The quality of the attention is irrele¬ 
vant. No matter how badly his shows were reviewed, or how slanderously 
personal were the attacks on his hoaxes, Bamum would never complain. If 
a newspaper critic reviled him particularly badly, in fact, he made sure to 
invite the man to an opening and to give him the best seat in the house. He 
would even write anonymous attacks on his own work, just to keep his 
name in the papers. From Bamum’s vantage, attention—whether negative 
or positive—was the main ingredient of his success. The worst fate in the 
world for a man who yearns fame, glory, and, of course, power is to be 
ignored. 

If the courtier happens to engage in arms in some public spectacle 
such as jousting . . . he will ensure that the horse he has is beautifully 
caparisoned, that he himself is suitably attired, with appropriate 
mottoes and ingenious devices to attract the eyes of the onlookers 
in his direction as surely as the lodestone attracts iron. 

Huldassare Castiglione. 1478-1529 


reports that Oossaert 
attracted the attention 
of Emperor Charles V 
by wearing a fantastic 
paper costume. In 
doing so he was adopt¬ 
ing the tactics used by 
Dinocrates, who „ in 
order to gain access to 
Alexander the Great, is 
said to have appeared 
disguised as the naked 
Hercules when the 
monarch was sitting in 
judgment . 

THE COURT ARTIST. 

Martin Warnke, 

1993 


KEYS TO POWER 

Burning more brightly than those around you is a skill that no one is bom 
with. You have to learn to attract attention, “as surely as the lodestone at¬ 
tracts iron.” At the start of your career, you must attach your name and rep¬ 
utation to a quality, an image, that sets you apart from other people. This 
image can be something like a characteristic style of dress, or a personality 
quirk that amuses people and gets talked about. Once the image is estab¬ 
lished, you have an appearance, a place in the sky for your star. 

It is a common mistake to imagine that this peculiar appearance of 
yours should not be controversial, that to be attacked is somehow bad. 
Nothing could be further from the truth, lb avoid being a flash in the pan, 
and having your notoriety eclipsed by another, you must not discriminate 
between different types of attention; in the end, every kind will work in 
your favor. Bamum, we have seen, welcomed personal attacks and felt 
no need to defend himself. He deliberately courted the image of being a 
humbug. 


I.AW 6 


47 



The court of Louis XIV contained many talented writers, artists, great 
beauties, and men and women of impeccable virtue, but no one was more 
talked about than the singular Due de Lauzun. The duke was short, almost 
dwarfish, and he was prone to the most insolent kinds of behavior—he 
slept with the king’s mistress, and openly insulted not only other courtiers 
but the king himself. Louis, however, was so beguiled by the duke’s eccen¬ 
tricities that he could not bear his absences from the court. It was simple: 
The strangeness of the duke’s character attracted attention. Once people 
were enthralled by him, they wanted him around at any cost. 

Society craves larger-than-life figures, people who stand above the 
general mediocrity. Never be afraid, then, of the qualities that set you apart 
and draw attention to you. Court controversy, even scandal. It is better to 
be attacked, even slandered, than ignored. All professions are ruled by this 
law, and all professionals must have a bit of the showman about them. 

The great scientist Thomas Edison knew that to raise money he had to 
remain in the public eye at any cost. Almost as important as the inventions 
themselves was how he presented them to the public and courted attention. 

Edison would design visually dazzling experiments to display his dis¬ 
coveries with electricity. He would talk of future inventions that seemed 
fantastic at the time—robots, and machines that could photograph 
thought—and that he had no intention of wasting his energy on, but that 
made the public talk about him. He did everything he could to make sure 
that he received more attention than his great rival Nikola Tesla, who may 
actually have been more brilliant than he was but whose name was far less 
known. In 1915, it was rumored that Edison and Tesla would be joint recip¬ 
ients of that year’s Nobel Prize in physics. The prize was eventually given to 
a pair of English physicists; only later was it discovered that the prize com¬ 
mittee had actually approached Edison, but he had turned them down, re 
fusing to share the prize with Tesla. By that time his fame was more secure 
than Tesla’s, and he thought it better to refuse the honor than to allow his 
rival the attention that would have come even from sharing the prize. 

If you find yourself in a lowly position that offers little opportunity for 
you to draw attention, an effective trick is to attack the most visible, most 
famous, most powerful person you can find. When Pietro Aretino, a young 
Roman servant boy of the early sixteenth century, wanted to get attention 
as a writer of verses, he decided to publish a series of satirical poems ridi¬ 
culing the pope and his affection for a pet elephant The attack put Aretino 
in the public eye immediately. A slanderous attack on a person in a posi¬ 
tion of power would have a similar effect. Remember, however, to use such 
tactics sparingly after you have the public’s attention, when the act can 
wear thin. 

Once in the limelight you must constantly renew it by adapting and 
varying your method of courting attention. If you don’t, the public will 
grow tired, will take you for granted, and will move on to a newer star. The 
game requires constant vigilance and creativity. Pablo Picasso never al¬ 
lowed himself to fade into the background; if his name became too at- 



tached to a particular style, he would deliberately upset the public with a 
new series of paintings that went against all expectations. Better to create 
something ugly and disturbing, he believed, than to let viewers grow too fa¬ 
miliar with his work. Understand: People feel superior to the person whose 
actions they can predict. If you show them who is in control by playing 
against their expectations, you both gain their respect and tighten your hold 
on their fleeting attention. 


Image: 

The Limelight. The 
actor who steps into this bril¬ 
liant light attains a heightened 
presence. All eyes are on him. There 
is room for only one actor at a time in 
the limelight’s narrow beam; do what¬ 
ever it takes to make yourself its focus. 
Make your gestures so large, amus¬ 
ing, and scandalous that the 
light stays on you while the 
other actors are left in 
the shadows. 


Authority: Be ostentatious and 
be seen. . . . What is not seen is 
as though it did not exist. ... It 
was light that first caused all cre¬ 
ation to shine forth. Display fills 
up many blanks, covers up defi¬ 
ciencies, and gives everything 
a second life, especially when it 
is backed by genuine merit. 
(Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658) 




PART II: CREATE AN AIR OF MYSTERY 
In a world grouting increasingly banal and familiar, what seems enig¬ 
matic instantly draws attention. Never make it too clear what you aw 
doing or about to do. Do not show all your cards. A n air of mystery height¬ 
ens your presence; it also creates anticipation—everyone will be watching 
you to see what happens next. Use mystery to begu ile, seduce, even frighten . 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

Beginning in 1905, rumors started to spread throughout Paris of a young 
Oriental girl who danced in a private home, wrapped in veils that she grad¬ 
ually discarded. A local journalist who had seen her dancing reported that 
“a woman from the Far East had come to Europe laden with perfume and 
jewels, to introduce some of the richness of the Oriental colour and life into 
the satiated society of European cities.” Soon everyone knew the dancer’s 
name: Mata Hari. 

Early that year, in the winter, small and select audiences would gather 
in a salon filled with Indian statues and other relics while an orchestra 
played music inspired by Hindu and Javanese melodies. After keeping the 
audience waiting and wondering, Mata Hari would suddenly appear, in a 
startling costume: a white cotton brassiere covered with Indian-type jewels; 
jeweled bands at the waist supporting a sarong that revealed as much as it 
concealed; bracelets up the arms. Then Mata Hari would dance, in a style 
no one in France had seen before, her whole body swaying as if she were in 
a trance. She told her excited and curious audience that her dances told 
stories from Indian mythology and Javanese folktales. Soon the cream of 
Paris, and ambassadors from far-off lands, were competing for invitations 
to the salon, where it was rumored that Mata Hari was actually performing 
sacred dances in the nude. 

The public wanted to know more about her. She told journalists that 
she was actually Dutch in origin, but had grown up on the island of Java. 
She would also talk about time spent in India, how she had learned sacred 
Hindu dances there, and how Indian women “can shoot straight, ride 
horseback, and are capable of doing logarithms and talk philosophy.” By 
the summer of 1905, although few Parisians had actually seen Mata Hari 
dance, her name was on everyone’s lips. 

As Mata Hari gave more interviews, the story of her origins kept 
changing: She had grown up in India, her grandmother was the daughter 
of a Javanese princess, she had lived on the island of Sumatra where she 
had spent her time “horseback riding, gun in hand, and risking her life.” 
No one knew anything certain about her, but journalists did not mind these 
changes in her biography. They compared her to an Indian goddess, a 
creature from the pages of Baudelaire—whatever their imagination wanted 
to see in this mysterious woman from the East. 

In August of 1905, Mata Hari performed for the first time in public. 



Crowds thronging to see her on opening night caused a riot. She had now 
become a cult figure, spawning many imitations. One reviewer wrote, 
“Mata Hari personifies all the poetry of India, its mysticism, its voluptuous¬ 
ness, its hypnotizing charm.” Another noted, “If India possesses such unex¬ 
pected treasures, then all Frenchmen will emigrate to the shores of the 
Ganges.” 

Soon the fame of Mata Hari and her sacred Indian dances spread be¬ 
yond Paris. She was invited to Berlin, Vienna, Milan. Over the next few 
years she performed throughout Europe, mixed with the highest social cir¬ 
cles, and earned an income that gave her an independence rarely enjoyed 
by a woman of the period. Then, near the end of World War I, she was ar¬ 
rested in France, tried, convicted, and finally executed as a German spy. 
Only during the trial did the truth come out: Mata Hari was not from Java 
or India, had not grown up in the Orient, did not have a drop of Eastern 
blood in her body. Her real name was Margaretha Zelle, and she came 
from the stolid northern province of Friesland, Holland. 

Interpretation 

When Margaretha Zelle arrived in Paris, in 1904, she had half a franc in 
her pocket. She was one of the thousands of beautiful young girls who 
flocked to Paris every year, taking work as artists’ models, nightclub 
dancers, or vaudeville performers at the Folies Bergere. After a few years 
they would inevitably be replaced by younger girls, and would often end 
up on the streets, turning to prostitution, or else returning to the town they 
came from, older and chastened. 

Zelle had higher ambitions. She had no dance experience and had 
never performed in the theater, but as a young girl she had traveled with 
her family and had witnessed local dances in Java and Sumatra. Zelle 
clearly understood that what was important in her act was not the dance it¬ 
self, or even her face or figure, but her ability to create an air of mystery 
about herself. The mystery she created lay not just in her dancing, or her 
costumes, or the stories she would tell, or her endless lies about her origins; 
it lay in an atmosphere enveloping everything she did. There was nothing 
you could say for sure about her—she was always changing, always sur¬ 
prising her audience with new costumes, new dances, new stories. This air 
of mystery left the public always wanting to know more, always wondering 
about her next move. Mata Hari was no more beautiful than many of the 
other young girls who came to Paris, and she was not a particularly good 
dancer. What separated her from the mass, what attracted and held the 
public’s attention and made her famous and wealthy, was her mystery. 
People are enthralled by mystery; because it invites constant interpreta¬ 
tion, they never tire of it. The mysterious cannot be grasped. And what 
cannot be seized and consumed creates power. 


r 


LAW 6 | 51 



KEYS TO POWER 

In the pash the world was filled with the terrifying and unknowable— 
diseases, disasters, capricious despots, the mystery of death itself. What we 
could not understand we reimagined as myths and spirits. Over the cen¬ 
turies, though, we have managed, through science and reason, to illumi¬ 
nate the darkness; what was mysterious and forbidding has grown familiar 
and comfortable. Yet this light has a price: in a world that is ever more 
banal, that has had its mystery and myth squeezed out of it, we secretly 
crave enigmas, people or things that cannot be instantly interpreted, 
seized, and consumed. 

That is the power of the mysterious: It invites layers of interpretation, 
excites our imagination, seduces us into believing that it conceals some¬ 
thing marvelous. The world has become so familiar and its inhabitants so 
predictable that what wraps itself in mystery will almost always draw the 
limelight to it and make us watch it. 

Do not imagine that to create an air of mystery you have to be grand 
and awe-inspiring. Mystery" that is woven into your day-to-day demeanor, 
and is subtle, has that much more power to fascinate and attract attention. 
Remember: Most people are upfront, can be read like an open book, take 
little care to control their words or image, and are hopelessly predictable. 
By simply holding back, keeping silent, occasionally uttering ambiguous 
phrases, deliberately appearing inconsistent, and acting odd in the subtlest 
of ways, you will emanate an aura of mystery. The people around you will 
then magnify that aura by constantly trying to interpret you. 

Both artists and con artists understand the vital link between being 
mysterious and attracting interest. Count Victor Lustig, the aristocrat of 
swindlers, played the game to perfection. He was always doing things that 
were different, or seemed to make no sense. He would show up at the best 
hotels in a limo driven by a Japanese chauffeur; no one had ever seen a 
Japanese chauffeur before, so this seemed exotic and strange. Lustig would 
dress in the most expensive clothing, but always widi something—a medal, 
a flower, an armband—out of place, at least in conventional terms. This 
was seen not as tasteless but as odd and intriguing. In hotels he would be 
seen receiving telegrams at all hours, one after the other, brought to him by 
his Japanese chauffeur—telegrams he would tear up with utter noncha¬ 
lance. (In fact they were fakes, completely blank.) He would sit alone in the 
dining room, reading a large and impressive-looking book, smiling at peo¬ 
ple yet remaining aloof. Within a tew days, of course, the entire hotel 
would be abuzz with interest in this strange man. 

All this attention allowed Lustig to lure suckers in with ease. They 
would beg for his confidence and his company. Everyone wanted to be 
seen with this mysterious aristocrat. And in the presence of this distracting 
enigma, they wouldn’t even notice that they were being robbed blind. 

An air of mystery can make the mediocre appear intelligent and pro¬ 
found. It made Mata Hari, a woman of average appearance and intelli¬ 
gence, seem like a goddess, and her dancing divinely inspired. An air of 


52 


LAW 6 




mystery about an artist makes his or her artwork immediately more intrigu¬ 
ing, a trick Marcel Duchamp played to great effect. It is all very easy to 
do—say little about your work, tease and titillate with alluring, even contra¬ 
dictory comments, then stand back and let others try to make sense of it all. 

Mysterious people put others in a kind of inferior position—that of try¬ 
ing to figure them out To degrees that they can control, they also elicit the 
fear surrounding anything uncertain or unknown. AH great leaders know 
that an aura of mystery draws attention to them and creates an intimidating 
presence. Mao Tse-tung, for example, cleverly cultivated an enigmatic 
image; he had no worries about seeming inconsistent or contradicting him¬ 
self—the very contradictoriness of his actions and words meant that he al¬ 
ways had the upper hand. No one, not even his own wife, ever felt they 
understood him, and he therefore seemed larger than life. This also meant 
that the public paid constant attention to him, ever anxious to witness his 
next move. 

If your social position prevents you from completely wrapping your 
actions in mystery, you must at least learn to make yourself less obvious. 
Every now and then, act in a way that does not mesh with other people’s 
perception of you. This way you keep those around you on the defensive, 
eliciting the kind of attention that makes you powerful. Done right, the cre¬ 
ation of enigma can also draw the kind of attention that strikes terror into 
your enemy. 

During the Second Punic War (219-202 B.C.), the great Carthaginian 
general Hannibal was wreaking havoc in his march on Rome. Hannibal 
was known for his cleverness and duplicity. 

Under his leadership Carthage’s army, though smaller than those of 
the Romans, had constantly outmaneuvered them. On one occasion, 
though, Hannibal’s scouts made a horrible blunder, leading his troops into 
a marshy terrain with the sea at their back. The Roman army blocked the 
mountain passes that led inland, and its general, Fabius, was ecstatic—at 
last he had Hannibal trapped. Posting his best sentries on the passes, he 
worked on a plan to destroy Hannibal’s forces. But in the middle of the 
night, the sentries looked down to see a mysterious sight: A huge proces¬ 
sion of lights was heading up the mountain. Thousands and thousands of 
lights. If this was Hannibal’s army, it had suddenly grown a hundredfold. 

The sentries argued heatedly about what this could mean: Reinforce¬ 
ments from the sea? Troops that had been hidden in the area? Ghosts? No 
explanation made sense. 

As they watched, fires broke out all over the mountain, and a horrible 
noise drifted up to them from below, like the blowing of a million horns. 
Demons, they thought. The sentries, the bravest and most sensible in the 
Roman army, fled their posts in a panic. 

By the next day, Hannibal had escaped from the marshland. What was 
his trick? Had he really conjured up demons? Actually what he had done 
was order bundles of twigs to be fastened to the horns of the thousands of 
oxen that traveled with his troops as beasts of burden. The twigs were then 



lit, giving the impression of the torches of a vast army heading up the 
mountain- When the flames burned down to the oxen’s skin, they stam¬ 
peded in all directions, bellowing like mad and setting fires all over the 
mountainside. The key to this device’s success was not the torches, the 
fires, or the noises in themselves, however, but the fact that Hannibal had 
created a puzzle that captivated the sentries’ attention and gradually terri¬ 
fied them. From the mountaintop there was no way to explain this bizarre 
sight. If the sentries could have explained it they would have stayed at their 
posts. 

If you find yourself trapped, cornered, and on the defensive in some 
situation, try a simple experiment: Do something that cannot be easily ex¬ 
plained or interpreted. Choose a simple action, but carry it out in a way 
that unsettles your opponent, a way with many possible interpretations, 
making your intentions obscure. Don’t just be unpredictable (although this 
tactic too can be successful—see Law 17); like Hannibal, create a scene that 
cannot be read. There will seem to be no method to your madness, no 
rhyme or reason, no single explanation. If you do this right, you will in¬ 
spire fear and trembling and the sentries will abandon their posts. Call it 
the “feigned madness of Hamlet” tactic, for Hamlet uses it to great effect in 
Shakespeare’s play, frightening his stepfather Claudius through the mys¬ 
tery of his behavior. The mysterious makes your forces seem larger, your 
power more terrifying. 


Image: The Dance of 
the Veils—the veils 
envelop the dancer. 
What they reveal 
causes excitement. 
What they conceal 
heightens interest. The 
essence of mystery. 


Authority: If you do not declare yourself immediately, you arouse 
expectation. . . . Mix a little mystery with everything, and the very 
mystery stirs up veneration. And when you explain, be not too ex¬ 
plicit. ... In this manner you imitate the Divine way when you 
cause men to v/onder and watch. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658) 



REVERSAL 

In the beginning of your rise to the top, you must attract attention at all 
cost, but as you rise higher you must constantly adapt. Never wear the pub¬ 
lic out with the same tactic. An air of mystery works wonders for those who 
need to develop an aura of power and get themselves noticed, but it must 
seem measured and under control. Mata Hari went too far with her fabri¬ 
cations; although the accusation that she was a spy was false, at the time it 
was a reasonable presumption because all her lies made her seem suspi¬ 
cious and nefarious. Do not let your air of mystery be slowly transformed 
into a reputation for deceit. The mystery you create must seem a game, 
playful and unthreatening. Recognize when it goes too far, and pull back. 

There are times when the need for attention must be deferred, and 
when scandal and notoriety are the last things you want to create. The at¬ 
tention you attract must never offend or challenge the reputation of those 
above you—not, at any rate, if they are secure. You will seem not only pal¬ 
try but desperate by comparison. There is an art to knowing when to draw 
notice and when to withdraw. 

Lola Montez was one of the great practitioners of the art of attracting 
attention. She managed to rise from a middle-class Irish background to 
being the lover of Franz Liszt and then the mistress and political adviser of 
King Ludwig of Bavaria. In her later years, though, she lost her sense of 
proportion. 

In London in 1850 there was to be a performance of Shakespeare’s 
Macbeth featuring the greatest actor of the time, Charles John Kean. Every¬ 
one of consequence in English society was to be there; it was rumored that 
even Queen Victoria and Prince Albert were to make a public appearance. 
The custom of the period demanded that everyone be seated before the 
queen arrived. So the audience got there a little early, and when the queen 
entered her royal box, they observed the convention of standing up and 
applauding her. The royal couple waited, then bowed. Everyone sat down 
and the lights were dimmed. Then, suddenly, all eyes turned to a box op¬ 
posite Queen Victoria’s: A woman appeared from the shadows, taking her 
seat later than the queen. It was Lola Montez. She wore a diamond tiara on 
her dark hair and a long fur coat over her shoulders. People whispered in 
amazement as the ermine cloak was dropped to reveal a low-necked gown 
of crimson velvet. By turning their heads, the audience could see that the 
royal couple deliberately avoided looking at Lola’s box. They followed 
Victoria’s example, and for the rest of the evening Lola Montez was ig¬ 
nored. After that evening no one in fashionable society dared to be seen 
with her. All her magnetic powers were reversed. People would flee her 
sight. Her future in England was finished. 

Never appear overly greedy for attention, then, for it signals insecurity, 
and insecurity drives power away. Understand that there are times when it 
is not in your interest to be the center of attention. When in the presence of 
a king or queen, for instance, or the equivalent thereof, how and retreat to 
the shadows; never compete. 



LAW 


7 

GET OTHERS TO DO THE 
WORK FOR YOU, BUT 
ALWAYS TAKE THE CREDIT 


JUDGMENT 

Use the wisdom, knowledge, and legwork of other people 
to farther your awn cause . Not only will such assistance 
save you valuable time and energy , it will give you a 
godlike aura of efficiency and speed . In the end your 
helpers will be forgotten and you mil be remembered. 
Never do yourself what others can do for you. 



TRANSGRESSION AND OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 
In 1883 a young Serbian scientist named Nikola Tesla was working for the 
European division of the Continental Edison Company, He was a brilliant 
inventor, and Charles Batchelor, a plant manager and a personal friend of 
Thomas Edison, persuaded him he should seek his fortune in America, giv¬ 
ing him a letter of introduction to Edison himself. So began a life of woe 
and tribulation that lasted until Tesla’s death. 

When Tesla met Edison in New York, the famous inventor hired him 
on the spot. Tesla worked eighteen-hour days, finding ways to improve the 
primitive Edison dynamos. Finally he offered to redesign them completely. 
To Edison this seemed a monumental task that could last years without 
paying off, but he told Tesla, “There’s fifty thousand dollars in it for you— if 
you can do it.” Tesla labored day and night on the project and after only a 
year he produced a greatly improved version of the dynamo, complete 
with automatic controls. He went to Edison to break the good news and re¬ 
ceive his $50,000. Edison was pleased with the improvement, for which he 
and his company would take credit, but when it came to the issue of the 
money he told the young Serb, “Tesla, you don’t understand our American 
humor!,” and offered a small raise instead. 

Tesla’s obsession was to create an alternating-current system (AC) of 
electricity. Edison believed in the direct-current system (DC), and not only 
refused to support Tesla’s research but later did all he could to sabotage 
him. Tesla turned to the great Pittsburgh magnate George Westinghouse, 
who had started his own electricity company. Westinghouse completely 
funded Tesla’s research and offered him a generous royalty agreement on 
future profits. The AC system Tesla developed is still the standard today— 
but after patents were filed in his name, other scientists came forward to 
take credit for the invention, claiming that they had laid the groundwork 
for him. His name was lost in the shuffle, and the public came to associate 
the invention with Westinghouse himself. 

A year later, Westinghouse was caught in a takeover bid from 
J. Pierpont Morgan, who made him rescind the generous royalty contract 
he had signed with Tesla. Westinghouse explained to the scientist that his 
company would not survive if it had to pay him his full royalties; he per¬ 
suaded Tesla to accept a buyout of his patents for $216,000—a large sum, 
no doubt, but far less than the $12 million they were worth at the time. The 
financiers had divested Tesla of the riches, the patents, and essentially the 
credit for the greatest invention of his career. 

The name of Guglielmo Marconi is forever linked with the invention 
of radio. But few know that in producing his invention—he broadcast a sig¬ 
nal across the English Channel in 1899—Marconi made use of a patent 
Tesla had filed in 1897, and that his work depended on Tesla’s research. 
Once again Tesla received no money and no credit lesla invented an in¬ 
duction motor as well as the AC power system, and he is the real “father of 
radio ” Yet none of these discoveries bear his name. As an old man, he 
lived in poverty. 


THE TORTOISE. THE 
ELEPHANT. AND THE 
HIPPOPOTAMUS 

One day the tortoise 
met the elephant, who 
trumpeted, "Out of my 
way, you weakling — 

/ might step on you!” 
The tortoise was not 
afraid and stayed 
where he was, so the 
elephant stepped on 
him, but could not 
crush him. "Do not 
boast, Mr. Elephant, 1 
am as strong as you 
are!"said the tortoise, 
but the elephant lust 
laughed . So the tortoise 
asked him to come 
to his hill the next- 
morning. 

The next day, before 
sunrise, the tortoise ran 
down the hill to the 
river, where he. met the 
hippopotamus, who 
hw just on his way 
back into the water 
after his nocturnal 
feeding. “Mr Hippo! 
Shall we have a tug-of- 
war? 1 bet Pm as 
strong as you are!” 
said the tortoise. The 
hippopotamus laughed 
at this ridiculous idea, 
but agreed. The tortoise 
produced a long rope 
and told the hippo to 
hold it in his mouth 
until the tortoise 
shouted "Hey!” 

Then the tortoise ran 
back up the hill where 
he found the elephant, 
who was getting impa¬ 
tient. He gave the 
elephant the other end 
of the rope and said, 

“ When I say ‘Hey!’ 
pull, and you’ll see 
which of us is the 
strongest.” Then he ran 
halfway back down the 


LAW 7 [ 57 



hill, to a place where he 
eouldn V he seen, and 
shouted, "Hey!" The 
elephant and the 
hippopotamus pulled 
and pulled, but neither 
could budge the 
other—they were of 
equal strength. They 
both agreed that the 
tortoise was as strong 
as they were. 
Never do what others 
can do for you. The tor- 
Udse let others do (he 
work for him while he 
got the credit. 

ZaJRHAN l-Alil h 


To be sure, if the hunter 
relies on the security of 
the carriage, utilizes the 
legs of the six horses, 
and makes Wang Liang 
hold ihetr reins, then he 
will not tire himself 
and will find it easy to 
overtake swift animals. 

Now supposing he 
discarded the advan¬ 
tage of the carriage , 
gave up the useful legs 
of the horses and the 
skill of Wang Liang, 
and alighted to run 
after the animals ; then 
even though his legs 
were as (puck as Lou 
Chi's, he would not he 
in time to overtake the 
animals. In fact, if good 
horses and strong 
carriages are taken into 
use, then mere bond¬ 
men and bondwomen 
will be good enough to 
catch the animals. 

Hak-fki-tzi;, 
ChjM'SH wuu>so!*iu;r, 

THIRD (T.NTURY 


58 ; law 7 


In 1917, during his later impoverished years, Tesla was told he was to 
receive the Edison Medal of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers. 
He turned the medal down. “You propose,” he said, “to honor me with a 
medal which I could pin upon my coat and strut for a vain hour before the 
members of your Institute. You would decorate my body and continue to 
let starve, for failure to supply recognition, my mind and its creative prod¬ 
ucts, which have supplied the foundation upon which the major portion of 
your Institute exists.” 

Interpretation 

Many harbor the illusion that science, dealing with facts as it does, is be¬ 
yond the petty rivalries that trouble the rest of the world. Nikola Tesla was 
one of those. He believed science had nothing to do with politics, and 
claimed not to care for fame and riches. As he grew older, though, this ru¬ 
ined his scientific work. Not associated with any particular discovery, he 
could attract no investors to his many ideas. While he pondered great in¬ 
ventions for the future, others stole the patents he had already developed 
and got the glory for themselves. 

He wanted to do everything on his own, but merely exhausted and im¬ 
poverished himself in the process. 

Edison was Tesla’s polar opposite. He wasn’t actually much of a scien¬ 
tific thinker or inventor; he once said that he had no need to be a mathe¬ 
matician because he could always hire one. That was Edison’s main 
method. He was really a businessman and publicist, spotting the trends and 
the opportunities that were out there, then hiring the best in the field to do 
the work for him. If he had to he would steal from his competitors. Yet his 
name is much better known than Tesla’s, and is associated with more in¬ 
ventions. 

The lesson is twofold: First, the credit for an invention or creation is as 
important, if not more important, than the invention itself. You must secure 
the credit for yourself and keep others from stealing it away, or from piggy¬ 
backing on your hard work. To accomplish this you must always be vigilant 
and ruthless, keeping your creation quiet until you can be sure there are no 
vultures circling overhead. Second, leam to take advantage of other peo¬ 
ple’s work to further your own cause. Time is precious and life is short. If 
you try to do it all on your own, you run yourself ragged, waste energy, and 
bum yourself out. It is far better to conserve your forces, pounce on the 
work others have done, and find a way to make it your own. 

Everybody steals in commerce and industry. 

Eve stolen a lot myself. 

But I know how to steal , 

Tho mas Edison, 184 7 1931 



KEYS TO POWER 

The world of power has the dynamics of the jangle: There are those who 
live by hunting and killing, and there are also vast numbers of creatures 
(hyenas, vultures) who live off the hunting of others. These latter, less 
imaginative types are often incapable of doing the work that is essential for 
the creation of power. They understand early on, though, that if they wait 
long enough, they can always find another animal to do the work for them. 
Do not be naive: At this very moment, while you are slaving away on some 
project, there are vultures circling above trying to figure out a way to sur¬ 
vive and even thrive off your creativity. It is useless to complain about this, 
or to wear yourself ragged with bitterness, as Tesla did. Better to protect 
yourself and join the game. Once you have established a power base, be¬ 
come a vulture yourself, and save yourself a lot of time and energy. 

Of the two poles of this game, one can be illustrated by the example of 
the explorer Vasco Nunez de Balboa. Balboa had an obsession—the dis¬ 
covery of El Dorado, a legendary city of vast riches. 

Early in the sixteenth century, after countless hardships and brushes 
with death, he found evidence of a great and wealthy empire to the south 
of Mexico, in present-day Peru. By conquering this empire, the Incan, and 
seizing its gold, he would make himself the next Cortes. The problem was 
that even as he made this discovery, word of it spread among hundreds of 
other conquistadors. He did not understand that half the game was keeping 
it quiet, and carefully watching those around him. A few years after he dis¬ 
covered the location of the Incan empire, a soldier in his own army, Fran¬ 
cisco Pizarro, helped to get him beheaded for treason. Pizarro went on to 
take what Balboa had spent so many years trying to find. 

The other pole is that of the artist Peter Paul Rubens, who, late in his 
career, found himself deluged with requests for paintings. He created a sys¬ 
tem: In his large studio he employed dozens of outstanding painters, one 
specializing in robes, another in backgrounds, and so on. He created a vast 
production line in which a large number of canvases would be worked on 
at the same time. When an important client visited the studio, Rubens 
would shoo his hired painters out for the day. While the client watched 
from a balcony, Rubens would work at an incredible pace, with unbeliev¬ 
able energy. The client would leave in awe of this prodigious man, who 
could paint so many masterpieces in so short a time. 

This is the essence of the Law: Learn to get others to do the work for 
you while you take the credit, and you appear to be of godlike strength and 
power. If you think it important to do all the work yourself, you will never 
get far, and you will suffer the fate of the Balboas and Teslas of the world. 
Find people with the skills and creativity you lack. Either hire them, while 
putting your own name on top of theirs, or find a way to take their work 
and make it your own. Their creativity thus becomes yours, and you seem 
a genius to the world. 

There is another application of this law that does not require the para¬ 
sitic use of your contemporaries’ labor: Use the past, a vast storehouse of 


nil HUM) Hi A 

A hen who had lost her 
sight, ami iv«.v metis- 
ton ted to sc ratching up 
the earth in search of 
food, although blind, 
still continued to 
scratch away most dili¬ 
gently. Of what use was 
it to the industrious 
fool? Another sharp- 
sighted hen who spared 
her tender feet never 
moved from her side, 
and enjoyed, without 
scratching, the fruit of 
the others labor . For as 
often as the blind hen 
scratched up a barley¬ 
corn, her watchful 
companion devoured 
ii. 

FABI.F.S, 

Gormoi.i) Li-ssiNc;, 
172917S1 


LAW 7 


59 




knowledge and wisdom. Isaac Newton called this ‘‘standing on the shoul¬ 
ders of giants.” He meant that in making his discoveries he had built on the 
achievements of others. A great part of his aura of genius, he knew, was at¬ 
tributable to his shrewd ability to make the most of the insights of ancient, 
medieval, and Renaissance scientists. Shakespeare borrowed plots, charac¬ 
terizations, and even dialogue from Plutarch, among other writers, for he 
knew that nobody surpassed Plutarch in the writing of subtle psychology 
and witty quotes. How many later writers have in their turn borrowed 
from— plagiarized —Shakespeare ? 

We all know how few of today’s politicians write their own speeches. 
Their own words would not win them a single vote; their eloquence and 
wit, whatever there is of it, they owe to a speech writer. Other people 
do the work, they take the credit. The upside of this is that it is a kind 
of power that is available to everyone. Learn to use the knowledge of the 
past and you will look like a genius, even when you are really just a clever 
borrower. 

Writers who have delved into human nature, ancient masters of strat¬ 
egy, historians of human stupidity and folly, kings and queens who have 
learned the hard way how to handle the burdens of power—their knowl¬ 
edge is gathering dust, waiting for you to come and stand on their shoul¬ 
ders. Their wit can be your wit, their skill can be your skill, and they will 
never come around to tell people how unoriginal you really are. You can 
slog through life, making endless mistakes, wasting time and energy trying 
to do things from your own experience. Or you can use the armies of the 
past. As Bismarck once said, “Fools say that they learn by experience. I 
prefer to profit by others’ experience.” 


Image: The Vulture. Of all the creatures in 
the jungle, he has it the easiest. The 
hard work of others becomes his work; 
their failure to survive becomes his 
nourishment. Keep an eye on 
the Vulture—while you are 
hard at work, he is cir¬ 
cling above. Do not 
fight him, join 
him. 


Authority: There is much to be known, life is short, and life is not life 
without knowledge. It is therefore an excellent device to acquire 
knowledge from everybody. Thus, by the sweat of another’s brow, you 
win the reputation of being an oracle. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658) 



REVERSAL 

There are times when taking the credit for work that others have done is 
not the wise course: If your power is not firmly enough established, you 
will seem to be pushing people out of the limelight. To be a brilliant ex¬ 
ploiter of talent your position must be unshakable, or you will be accused 
of deception. 

Be sure you know when letting other people share the credit serves 
your purpose. It is especially important to not be greedy when you have a 
master above you. President Richard Nixon’s historic visit to the People’s 
Republic of China was originally his idea, but it might never have come off 
but for the deft diplomacy of Henry Kissinger. Nor would it have been as 
successful without Kissinger’s skills. Still, when the time came to take 
credit, Kissinger adroitly let Nixon take the lion’s share. Knowing that the 
truth would come out later, he was careful not to jeopardize his standing in 
the short term by hogging the limelight. Kissinger played the game ex¬ 
pertly: He took credit for the work of those below him while graciously 
giving credit for his own labors to those above. That is the way to play 
the game. 



LAW 



MAKE OTHER PEOPLE 
COME TO YOU— 

USE BAIT IF NECESSARY 


JUDGMENT 

When you force the other person to act, you are the one in 
control It is always better to make.your opponent come to 
you, abandoning his own plans in the process. Lure him 
with fabulous gains—then attack. You hold the cards . 



OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

At the Congress of Vienna in 1814, the major powers of Europe gathered to 
carve up the remains of Napoleon’s fallen Empire. The city was full of gai¬ 
ety and the balls were the most splendid in memory. Hovering over the 
proceedings, however, was the shadow of Napoleon himself. Instead of 
being executed or exiled far away, he had been sent to the island of Elba, 
not far from the coast of Italy 

Even imprisoned on an island, a man as bold and creative as 
Napoleon Bonaparte made everyone nervous. The Austrians plotted to kill 
him on Elba, but decided it was too risky Alexander I, Russia’s tempera¬ 
mental czar, heightened the anxiety by throwing a fit during the congress 
when a part of Poland was denied him: “Beware, I shall loose the mon¬ 
ster!” he threatened. Everyone knew he meant Napoleon. Of all the states¬ 
men gathered in Vienna, only Talleyrand, Napoleon’s former foreign 
minister, seemed calm and unconcerned. It was as if he knew something 
the others did not. 

Meanwhile, on the island of Elba, Napoleon’s life was a mockery of his 
previous glory. As Elba’s “king,” he had been allowed to form a court-— 
there was a cook, a wardrobe mistress, an official pianist, and a handful of 
courtiers. All this was designed to humiliate Napoleon, and it seemed to 
work. 

That winter, however, there occurred a series of events so strange and 
dramatic they might have been scripted in a play Elba was surrounded by 
British ships, their cannons covering all possible exit points. "Vet somehow, 
in broad daylight on 26 February 1815, a ship with nine hundred men on 
board picked up Napoleon and put to sea. The English gave chase but the 
ship got away. This almost impossible escape astonished the public 
throughout Europe, and terrified the statesmen at the Congress of Vienna. 

Although it would have been safer to leave Europe, Napoleon not only 
chose to return to France, he raised the odds by marching on Paris with a 
tiny army, in hopes of recapturing the throne. His strategy worked—people 
of all classes threw themselves at his feet. An army under Marshal Ney sped 
from Paris to arrest him, but when the soldiers saw their beloved former 
leader, they changed sides. Napoleon was declared emperor again. Volun¬ 
teers swelled the ranks of his new army Delirium swept the country. In Paris, 
crowds went wild. The king who had replaced Napoleon fled the country. 

For the next hundred days, Napoleon ruled France. Soon, however, the 
giddiness subsided. France was bankrupt, its resources nearly exhausted, 
and there was little Napoleon could do about this. At the Battle of Waterloo, 
in June of that year, he was finally defeated for good. This time his enemies 
had learned their lesson: They exiled him to the barren island of Saint He¬ 
lena, off the west coast of Africa. There he had no more hope of escape. 

Interpretation 

Only years later did the facts of Napoleon’s dramatic escape from Elba 
come to light. Before he decided to attempt this bold move, visitors to his 
court had told him that he was more popular in France than ever, and that 



the country would embrace him again. One of these visitors was Austria’s 
General Roller, who convinced Napoleon that if he escaped, the European 
powers, England included, would welcome him back into power. Napoleon 
was tipped off that the English would let him go, and indeed his escape oc¬ 
curred in the middle of the afternoon, in full view of English spyglasses. 

What Napoleon did not know was that there was a man behind it all, 
pulling the strings, and that this man was his former minister, Talleyrand. 
And Talleyrand was doing all this not to bring back the glory days but to 
crush Napoleon once and for all. Considering the emperor’s ambition un¬ 
settling to Europe’s stability, he had turned against him long ago. When 
Napoleon was exiled to Elba, Talleyrand had protested. Napoleon should 
be sent farther away, he argued, or Europe would never have peace. But 
no one listened. 

Instead of pushing his opinion, Talleyrand bided his time. Working 
quietly, he eventually won over Castlereagh and Mettemich, the foreign 
ministers of England and Austria. 

Together these men baited Napoleon into escaping. Even Roller’s visit, 
to whisper the promise of glory in the exile’s ear, was part of the plan, like 
a master cardplayer, Talleyrand figured everything out in advance. He 
knew Napoleon would fall into the trap he had set He also foresaw that 
Napoleon would lead the country into a war, which, given France’s weak¬ 
ened condition, could only last a few months. One diplomat in Vienna, 
who understood that Talleyrand was behind it all, said, “He has set the 
house ablaze in order to save it from the plague.” 

When l have laid bait for deer ,; 

I don *t shoot at the first doe that comes to sniff 
but wait until the whole herd has gathered round . 

Otto von Bismarck, 1815-1898 


KEYS TO POWER 

How many times has this scenario played itself out in history: An aggres¬ 
sive leader initiates a series of bold moves that begin by bringing him 
much power. Slowly, however, his power reaches a peak, and soon every¬ 
thing tarns against him. His numerous enemies band together; trying to 
maintain his power, he exhausts himself going in this direction and that, 
and inevitably he collapses. The reason for this pattern is that the aggres¬ 
sive person is rarely in full control. He cannot see more than a couple of 
moves ahead, cannot see the consequences of this bold move or that one. 
Because he is constantly being forced to react to the moves of his ever¬ 
growing host of enemies, and to the unforeseen consequences of his own 
rash actions, his aggressive energy is turned against him. 

In the realm of power, you must ask yourself, what is the point of chas¬ 
ing here and there, trying to solve problems and defeat my enemies, if I 
never feel in control? Why am I always having to react to events instead of 
directing them? The answer is simple: Your idea of power is wrong. You 



have mistaken aggressive action for effective action. And most often the 
most effective action is to stay back, keep calm, and let others be frustrated 
by the traps you lay for them, playing for long-term power rather than 
quick victory. 

Remember: The essence of power is the ability to keep the initiative, 
to get others to react to your moves, to keep your opponent and those 
around you on the defensive. When you make other people come to you, 
you suddenly become the one controlling the situation. And the one who 
has control has power. Two things must happen to place you in this posi¬ 
tion: You yourself must learn to master your emotions, and never to be in¬ 
fluenced by anger; meanwhile, however, you must play on people’s natural 
tendency to react angrily when pushed and baited. In the long run, the 
ability to make others come to you is a weapon far more powerful than any 
tool of aggression. 

Study how Talleyrand, the master of the art, performed this delicate 
trick. First, he overcame the urge to try to convince his fellow statesmen 
that they needed to banish Napoleon far away. It is only natural to want to 
persuade people by pleading your case, imposing your will with words. But 
this often turns against you. Few of Talleyrand’s contemporaries believed 
Napoleon was still a threat, so that if he had spent a lot of energy trying to 
convince them, he would only have made himself look foolish. Instead, he 
held his tongue and his emotions in check. Most important of all, he laid 
Napoleon a sweet and irresistible trap. He knew the man’s weakness, his 
impetuosity, his need for glory and the love of the masses, and he played 
all this to perfection. When Napoleon went for the bait, there was no dan¬ 
ger that he might succeed and turn the tables on Talleyrand, who better 
than anyone knew France’s depleted state. And even had Napoleon been 
able to overcome these difficulties, the likelihood of his success would have 
been greater were he able to choose his time and place of action. By setting 
the proper trap, Talleyrand took the time and place into his own hands. 

All of us have only so much energy, and there is a moment when our 
energies are at their peak. When you make the other person come to you, 
he wears himself out, wasting his energy on the trip. In the year 1905, Rus¬ 
sia and Japan were at war. The Japanese had only recently begun to mod¬ 
ernize their warships, so that the Russians had a stronger navy, but by 
spreading false information the Japanese marshal Togo Heihachiro baited 
the Russians into leaving their docks in the Baltic Sea, making them believe 
they could wipe out the Japanese fleet in one swift attack. The Russian fleet 
could not reach Japan by the quickest route—through the Strait of Gibral¬ 
tar and then the Suez Canal into the Indian Ocean—because these were 
controlled by the British, and Japan was an ally of Great Britain. They had 
to go around the Cape of Good Hope, at the southern tip of Africa, adding 
over more than six thousand miles to the voyage. Once the fleet passed the 
Cape, the Japanese spread another false story: They were sailing to launch 
a counterattack. So the Russians made the entire journey to Japan on com¬ 
bat alert. By the time they arrived, their seamen were tense, exhausted, and 
overworked, while the Japanese had been waiting at their ease. Despite the 



odds and their lack of experience in modem naval warfare, the Japanese 
cmshed the Russians. 

One added benefit of making the opponent come to you, as the Japa¬ 
nese discovered with the Russians, is that it forces him to operate in your 
territory. Being on hostile ground will make him nerv ous and often he will 
rush his actions and make mistakes. For negotiations or meetings, it is al¬ 
ways wise to lure others into your territory, or the territory of your choice. 
You have your bearings, while they see nothing familiar and are subtly 
placed on the defensive. 

Manipulation is a dangerous game, Once someone suspects he is 
being manipulated, it becomes harder and harder to control him. But 
when you make your opponent come to you, you create the illusion that he 
is controlling the situation. He does not feel the strings that pull him, just as 
Napoleon imagined that he himself was the master of his daring escape and 
return to power. 

Everything depends on the sweetness of your bait. If your trap is at¬ 
tractive enough, the turbulence of your enemies’ emotions and desires will 
blind them to reality. The greedier they become, the more they can be led 
around. 

The great nineteenth-century robber baron Daniel Drew was a master 
at playing the stock market. When he wanted a particular stock to be 
bought or sold, driving prices up or down, he rarely resorted to the direct 
approach. One of his tricks was to hurry through an exclusive club near 
Wall Street, obviously on his way to the stock exchange, and to pull out his 
customary red bandanna to wipe his perspiring brow, A slip of paper 
would fall from this bandanna that he would pretend not to notice. The 
club’s members were always trying to foresee Drew’s moves, and they 
would pounce on the paper, which invariably seemed to contain an inside 
tip on a stock. Word would spread, and members would buy or sell the 
stock in droves, playing perfectly into Drew’s hands. 

If you can get other people to dig their own graves, why sweat your¬ 
self? Pickpockets work this to perfection. The key to picking a pocket is 
knowing which pocket contains the wallet. Experienced pickpockets often 
ply their trade in train stations and other places where there is a clearly 
marked sign reading BEWARE OF PICKPOCKE T. Passersby seeing the sign in¬ 
variably feel for their wallet to make sure it is still there. For the watching 
pickpockets, this is like shooting fish in a barrel. Pickpockets have even 
been known to place their own BEWARE OF PICKPOCKETS signs to ensure 
their success. 

When you are making people come to you, it is sometimes better to let 
them know you are forcing their hand. You give up deception for overt ma¬ 
nipulation. The psychological ramifications are profound: The person who 
makes others come to him appears powerful, and demands respect 

Filippo Brunelleschi, the great Renaissance artist and architect, was a 
great practitioner of the art of making others come to him as a sign of his 
power. On one occasion he had been engaged to repair the dome of the 
Santa Maria del Fiore cathedral in Florence. The commission was impor- 



tant and prestigious. But when the city officials hired a second man, 
Lorenzo Ghiberti, to work with Brunelleschi, the great artist brooded in se¬ 
cret. He knew that Ghiberti had gotten the job through his connections, 
and that he would do none of the work and get half the credit. At a critical 
moment of the construction, then, Brunelleschi suddenly developed a mys¬ 
terious illness. He had to stop work, but pointed out to city officials that 
they had hired Ghiberti, who should have been able to continue the work 
on his own. Soon it became clear that Ghiberti was useless and the officials 
came begging to Brunelleschi. He ignored them, insisting that Ghiberti 
should finish the project, until finally they realized the problem: They fired 
Ghiberti. 

By some miracle, Brunelleschi recovered within days. He did not have 
to throw a tantrum or make a fool of himself; he simply practiced the art of 
“making others come to you.” 

If on one occasion you make it a point of dignity that others must 
come to you and you succeed, they will continue to do so even after you 
stop trying. 


Image: The Honeyed 
Bear Trap. The bear hunter 
does not chase his prey; a bear 
that knows it is hunted is nearly 
impossible to catch and is fero¬ 
cious if cornered. Instead, the 
hunter lays traps baited with 
honey. He does not exhaust 
himself and risk his life in 
pursuit. He baits, then waits. 


Authority: Good warriors make others 
come to them, and do not go to others. This 
is the principle of emptiness and fullness 
of others and self. When you induce oppo¬ 
nents to come to you, then their force is 
always empty; as long as you do not 
go to them, your force is always full. Attack¬ 
ing emptiness with fullness is like throwing 
stones on eggs. (Zhang Yu, eleventh- 
century commentator on The Art of War) 



REVERSAL 

Although it is generally the wiser policy to make others exhaust themselves 
chasing you, there are opposite cases where striking suddenly and aggres¬ 
sively at the enemy so demoralizes him that his energies sink. Instead of 
making others come to you, you go to them, force the issue, take the lead. 
Fast attack can be an awesome weapon, for it forces the other person to 
react without the time to think or plan. With no time to think, people make 
errors of judgment, and are thrown on the defensive. This tactic is the ob¬ 
verse of waiting and baiting, but it serves the same function: You make 
your enemy respond on your terms. 

Men like Cesare Borgia and Napoleon used the element of speed to in¬ 
timidate and control. A rapid and unforeseen move is terrifying and de¬ 
moralizing. You must choose your tactics depending on the situation. If 
you have time on your side, and know that you and your enemies are at 
least at equal strength, then deplete their strength by making them come to 
you. If time is against you—your enemies are weaker, and waiting will only 
give them the chance to recover—give them no such chance. Strike quickly 
and they have nowhere to go. As the boxer Joe Louis put it, “He can run, 
but he can’t hide.” 


65 LAW 8 



LAW 


9 

WIN THROUGH YOUR 
ACTIONS, NEVER 
THROUGH ARGUMENT 


JUDGMENT 

Any momentary triumph you think you have gained 
through argument is really a Pyrrhic victory: The resent¬ 
ment and ill will you stir up is stronger and lasts longer 
than any momentary change of opinion . It is much more 
powerful to get others to agree with you through your 
actions, without saying a word. Demonstrate, do not 
explicate.. 


69 



flit. M Li \\ VM> 

( ML Vl/.il ii 

A vizier had .vm-ivl his 
muster for some thirty 
years and was known 
an cl admired for his 
loyally , truthfulness , 
and devotion to God. 
His honesty, however, 
had made him many 
enemies in the court, 
who spread stories of 
his duplicity and 
perfidy. They worked 
on the sultan day in 
and day out until he too 
came to distrust the 
innocent vizier ami 
finally ordered the man 
who had served him so 
well to he put to death, 
hi this realm, those 
condemned to death 
Were tied up and 
thrown into the pen 
where the sultan kept 
h is fieri viu him ting 
difgs. The dogs would 
promptly tear the 
victim to pieces. 
Before being thrown to 
the dogs, however, the 
vizier asked for one last 
request. "/ would like 
ten days' respite." he 
said, "so that l cun pay 
my debts, collect any 
money due to me, 
return items that people 
have put in my care, 
and share out uiv goods 
among the members of 
my family and tn y chil¬ 
dren and appoint a 
guardian for them. " 
After receiving a guar¬ 
antee that the vizier 
would not try to escape, 
the .sultan granted this 
request. 
The vizier hurried 
home , collected one 
hundred gold pieces, 
then paid a visit to the 
hunt smart who looked 
after the sultan s 

70 LAW 9 


TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

In 131 B.C., the Roman consul Publius Crassus Dives Mucianus, laying 
siege to the Greek town of Pergamus, found himself in need of a battering 
ram to force through the town’s walls. He had seen a couple of hefty ship’s 
masts in a shipyard in Athens a few days before, and he ordered that the 
larger of these be sent to him immediately. The military engineer in Athens 
who received the order felt certain that the consul really wanted the 
smaller of the masts. He argued endlessly with the soldiers who delivered 
the request: The smaller mast, he told them, was much better suited to the 
task. And indeed it would be easier to transport. 

The soldiers warned the engineer that their master was not a man to 
argue with, but he insisted that the smaller mast would be the only one that 
would work with a machine that he was constructing to go with it. He drew 
diagram after diagram, and went so far as to say that he was the expert and 
they had no clue what they were talking about The soldiers knew their 
leader and at last convinced the engineer that it would be better to swallow 
his expertise and obey. 

After they left, though, the engineer thought about it some more. What 
was the point, he asked himself, in obeying an order that would lead to fail¬ 
ure? And so he sent the smaller mast, confident that the consul would see 
how much more effective it was and reward him jusdy. 

When the smaller mast arrived, Mucianus asked his soldiers for an ex¬ 
planation. They described to him how the engineer had argued endlessly 
for the smaller mast, but had finally promised to send the larger one. Mu¬ 
cianus went into a rage. He could not concentrate on the siege, or consider 
the importance of breaching the walls before the town received reinforce¬ 
ments. All he could think about was the impudent engineer, whom he or¬ 
dered to be brought to him immediately. 

Arriving a few days later, the engineer gladly explained to the consul, 
one more time, the reasons for the smaller mast He went on and on, using 
the same arguments he had made with the soldiers. He said it was wise to 
listen to experts in these matters, and if the attack was only tried with the 
battering ram he had sent, the consul would not regret it Mucianus let him 
finish, then had him stripped naked before the soldiers and flogged and 
scourged with rods until he died. 

Interpretation 

The engineer, whose name has not been recorded by history, had spent his 
life designing masts and pillars, and was respected as the finest engineer in 
a city that had excelled in the science. He knew that he was right. A smaller 
ram would allow more speed and carry more force. Larger is not necessar¬ 
ily better. Of course the consul would see his logic, and would eventually 
understand that science is neutral and reason superior. How could the con¬ 
sul possibly persist in his ignorance if the engineer showed him detailed di¬ 
agrams and explained the theories behind his advice? 

The military engineer was the quintessence of the Arguer, a type 
found everywhere among us. The Arguer does not understand that words 



are never neutral, and that by arguing with a superior he impugns the intel¬ 
ligence of one more powerful than he. He also has no awareness of the per¬ 
son he is dealing with. Since each man believes that he is right, and words 
will rarely convince him otherwise, the arguer’s reasoning falls on deaf 
ears. When cornered, he only argues more, digging his own grave. Once 
he has made the other person feel insecure and inferior in his beliefs, the 
eloquence of Socrates could not save the situation. 

It is not simply a question of avoiding an argument with those who 
stand above you. We all believe we are masters in the realm of opinions 
and reasoning. You must be careful, then: Learn to demonstrate the cor¬ 
rectness of your ideas indirectly. 

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

In 1502, in Florence, Italy, an enormous block of marble stood in the 
works department of the church of Santa Maria del Fiore. It had once been 
a magnificent piece of raw stone, but an unskillful sculptor had mistakenly 
bored a hole through it where there should have been a figure's legs, gen¬ 
erally mutilating it. Piero Soderini, Florence’s mayor, had contemplated 
trying to save the block by commissioning Leonardo da Vinci to work on 
it, or some other master, but had given up, since everyone agreed that the 
stone had been ruined. So, despite the money that had been wasted on it, it 
gathered dust in the dark halls of the church. 

This was where things stood until some Florentine friends of the great 
Michelangelo decided to write to the artist, then living in Rome. He alone, 
they said, could do something with the marble, which was still magnificent 
raw material. Michelangelo traveled to Florence, examined the stone, and 
came to the conclusion that he could in fact carve a fine figure from it, by 
adapting the pose to the way the rock had been mutilated. Soderini argued 
that this was a waste of time—nobody could salvage such a disaster—but 
he finally agreed to let the artist work on it. Michelangelo decided he 
would depict a young David, sling in hand. 

Weeks later, as Michelangelo was putting the final touches on the 
statue, Soderini entered the studio. Fancying himself a bit of a connoisseur, 
he studied the huge work, and told Michelangelo that while he thought it 
was magnificent, the nose, he judged, was too big, Michelangelo realized 
that Soderini was standing in a place right under the giant figure and did 
not have the proper perspective. Without a word, he gestured for Soderini 
to follow him up the scaffolding. Reaching the nose, he picked up his 
chisel, as well as a bit of marble dust that lay on the planks. With Soderini 
just a few feet below him on the scaffolding, Michelangelo started to tap 
lightly with the chisel, letting the bits of dust he had gathered in his hand to 
fall little by little. He actually did nothing to change the nose, but gave 
every appearance of working on it. After a few minutes of this charade he 
stood aside; “Look at it now.” “I like it better,” replied Soderini, “you’ve 
made it come alive.” 


dogs. He offered this 
man the one hundred 
gold pieces and said, 
'"Let me look after the 
dogs for ten days," The 
huntsman agreed, and 
for the next ten days the 
vizier cared for the 
beasts with great atten¬ 
tion, grooming them 
weft and feeding them 
handsomely. By the end 
of the ten days they 
were eating out of his 
hand. 

On the eleventh day the 
vizier was called before 
the sultan , the charges 
were repeated, and (he 
sultan watched as the 
vizier was tied up and 
thrown to the dogs. Yet 
when the beasts saw 
him . they ran up to him 
with wagging tails . They 
nibbled affectionately at 
his shoulders and 
began playing with him. 
The. sultan and the 
other witnesses were 
amazed , and the sultan 
asked the vizier why the 
dogs had spared his 
life. The vizier replied . 

"I have looked after 
these dogs for ten days. 
The sultan has seen the 
result for himself. / 
have looked after you 
for thirty years, and 
what is the result? / am 
condemned to death on 
the strength of accusa¬ 
tions brought by my 
enemies." The sultan 
blushed with shame. 

He not only pardoned 
the vizier but gave him 
a fine set of clothes and 
handed over to him the 
men who had slandered 
his reputation. The noble 
vizier set them free and 
continued to treat them 
with kindness. 

THE SUBTLE RUSE: 

THE BOOK OF ARABIC 
WISDOM AND (HULK, 
THIRTEENTH CENT! >RY 


LAW 9 


71 



Tilt-: WORKS OF AMASIS 

When A pries hod been 
deposed in the way i 
have described , Amasis 
came to the throne. He 
belonged to the district 
of Sais and was a 
native of the town 
called Siupk At first 
the Egyptians were 
inclined to be contemp¬ 
tuous, and did not 
think much of him 
because of his humble 
and undistinguished 
origin; but later on he 
cleverly brought them 
to heel, without having 
recourse to harsh 
measures . 
Amongst his innumer¬ 
able treasures, he had a 
gold footbath, which he 
and his guests used on 
occasion to wash their 
feet in. This he broke 
up, and with the mate¬ 
rial had a statue made. 

w one of the gods, 
which he then set up in 
what he thought the 
most suitable spot in 
the city. The Egyptians 
constantly coming 
upon the statue, treated 
it with profound rever¬ 
ence, and as s oon as 
Amasis heard of the 
effect it had upon them, 
he called a meeting and 
revealed the fact that 
the deeply revered 
statue was once a foot¬ 
bath, which they 
washed their feet and 
pissed arid vomited in. 
He went on to say that 
his own case was much 
the. same, in that once 
he had been only an 
ordinary person and 
was now their king; so 
that just as they had 
come to revere the 
transformed footbuth, 
so they had better pay 


Interpretation 

Michelangelo knew that by changing the shape of the nose he might ruin 
the entire sculpture. Yet Soderini was a patron who prided himself on his 
aesthetic judgment. To offend such a man by arguing would not only gain 
Michelangelo nothing, it would put future commissions in jeopardy. 
Michelangelo was too clever to argue. His solution was to change 
Soderini’s perspective (literally bringing him closer to the nose) without 
making him realize that this was the cause of his misperception. 

Fortunately for posterity, Michelangelo found a way to keep the per¬ 
fection of the statue intact while at the same time making Soderini believe 
he had improved it Such is the double power of winning through actions 
rather than argument: No one is offended, and your point is proven. 


KEYS TO POWER 

In the realm of power you must learn to judge your moves by their long¬ 
term effects on other people. The problem in trying to prove a point or 
gain a victory through argument is that in the end you can never be certain 
how it affects the people you’re arguing with: They may appear to agree 
with you politely, but inside they may resent you. Or perhaps something 
you said inadvertently even offended them—words have that insidious 
ability to be interpreted according to the other person’s mood and insecuri¬ 
ties. Even the best argument has no solid foundation, for we have all come 
to distrust the slippery nature of words. And days after agreeing with some¬ 
one, we often revert to our old opinion out of sheer habit. 

Understand this: Words are a dime a dozen. Everyone knows that in 
the heat of an argument, we will all say anything to support our cause. We 
will quote the Bible, refer to unverifiable statistics. Who can be persuaded 
by bags of air like that? Action and demonstration are much more power¬ 
ful and meaningful They are there, before our eyes, for us to see—“Yes, 
now the statue’s nose does look just right” There are no offensive words, 
no possibility of misinterpretation. No one can argue with a demonstrated 
proof. As Baitasar Gracian remarks, “The truth is generally seen, rarely 
heard.” 

Sir Christopher Wren was England’s version of the Renaissance man. 
He had mastered the sciences of mathematics, astronomy, physics, and 
physiology. Yet during his extremely long career as England’s most cele¬ 
brated architect he was often told by his patrons to make impractical 
changes in his designs. Never once did he argue or offend. He had oilier 
ways of proving his point. 

In 1688 Wren designed a magnificent town hall for the city of West¬ 
minster. The mayor, however, was not satisfied; in fact he was nervous. He 
told Wren he was afraid the second floor was not secure, and that it could 
all come crashing down on his office on the first floor. He demanded that 
Wren add two stone columns for extra support. Wren, the consummate en¬ 
gineer, knew that these columns would serve no purpose, and that the 


72 LAW 9 



mayor’s fears were baseless- But build them he did, and the mayor was 
grateful- It was only years later that workmen on a high scaffold saw that 
the columns stopped just short of the ceiling. 

They were dummies. But both men got what they wanted: The mayor 
could relax, and Wren knew posterity would understand that his original 
design worked and the columns were unnecessary. 

The power of demonstrating your idea is that your opponents do not 
get defensive, and are therefore more open to persuasion. Making them lit¬ 
erally and physically feel your meaning is infinitely more powerful than ar¬ 
gument. 

A heckler once interrupted Nikita Khrushchev in the middle of a 
speech in which he was denouncing the crimes of Stalin. “You were a col¬ 
league of Stalin’s,*' the heckler yelled, “why didn’t you stop him then?” 
Khrushschev apparently could not see the heckler and barked out, “Who 
said that?” No hand went up. No one moved a muscle. After a few seconds 
of tense silence, Khrushchev finally said in a quiet voice, “Now you know 
why I didn’t stop him.” Instead of just arguing that anyone facing Stalin 
was afraid, knowing that the slightest sign of rebellion would mean certain 
death, he had made them feel what it was like to face Stalin—had made 
them feel the paranoia, the fear of speaking up, the terror of confronting 
the leader, in this case Khrushchev. The demonstration was visceral and no 
more argument was necessary. 

The most powerful persuasion goes beyond action into symbol. The 
power of a symbol—a flag, a mythic story, a monument to some emotional 
event—is that everyone understands you without anything being said. In 
1975, when Henry Kissinger was engaged in some frustrating negotiations 
with the Israelis over the return of part of the Sinai desert that they had 
seized in the 1967 war, he suddenly broke off a tense meeting and decided 
to do some sight seeing. He paid a visit to the ruins of the ancient fortress 
of Masada, known to all Israelis as the place where seven hundred Jewish 
warriors committed mass suicide in A.D. 73 rather than give in to the 
Roman troops besieging them. The Israelis instantly understood the mes¬ 
sage of Kissinger’s visit: He was indirectly accusing them of courting mass 
suicide. Although the visit did not by itself change their minds, it made 
them think far more seriously than any direct warning would have. Sym¬ 
bols like this one carry great emotional significance. 

When aiming for power, or trying to conserve it, always look for the 
indirect route. And also choose your battles carefully, if it does not matter 
in the long run whether die other person agrees with you—or if time and 
their own experience will make them understand what you mean—then it 
is best not even to bother with a demonstration. Save your energy and 
walk away. 


honor and respect to 
him, too. In this way 
the Egyptians were 
persuaded to accept 
him as their master. 

THE HISTORIES, 

Herodotus, 

FIFTH CENTURY B.C, 


COD AND ABRAHAM 

The Most High God 
had promised that He 
would not take Abra¬ 
ham *s soul unless the 
man wanted to die and 
asked Him to do so. 
When Abraham ’s life 
was drawing to a dose, 
and God determined to 
seize him. He sent an 
angel in the guise of a 
decrepit old man who 
was utmost entirely 
incapacitated. The old 
man stopped outside 
Abraham's door and 
said to him, "Oh Abra¬ 
ham, I would like 
something to eat. ’’ 
Abraham was amazed 
to hear him say this . 
"Die." exclaimed Abra¬ 
ham. "It would he 
better for you than to 
go on living in that 
condition. ’* 

Abraham always kept 
food ready at fits home 
for passing guests. So 
he gave the old man a 
bowl containing broth 
and meat with bread 
crumbs. The old man 
sat down to eat. He 
swallowed labo riously. 
with great effort , and 
once when he took 
some food it dropped 
from his hand . scatter¬ 
ing on the ground. “Oh 
Abraham, "he said. 


LAW 9 73 



"help me to cut." Abra¬ 
ham took the food in 
his hand and lifted it io 
the old man s tips. But 
it slid down his beard 
and over his chest. 
“What is vour age, old 
man?"asked Abraham. 

The old man 
mentioned a number of 
years slightly greater 
than Abrahams old 
age. Then Abraham 
exclaimed: “Oh Lord 
Our God, take me unto 
You before / reach this 
mans age and sink into 
the same condition as 
he is in now ." No 
sooner had Abraham 
spoken those, words 
than God took posses¬ 
sion of his soul. 

THE SUBTLE RUSE; 
TUB BOOK OF ARABIC 
WISDOM AND GUILE, 

t H uni -:knti l <: t: n it jry 


74 LAW 9 


Image: The See¬ 
saw, Up and down 
and up and down 
go the arguers, 
getting nowhere 
fast. Get off the 
seesaw and show 
them your mean¬ 
ing without kick 
ing or pushing. 
Leave them at the 
top and let gravity 
bring them gently 
to the ground. 


Authority: Never argue. In society nothing must be dis¬ 
cussed; give only results. (Benjamin Disraeli, 1804-1881) 


REVERSAL 

Verbal argument has one vital use in the realm of power: To distract and 
cover your tracks when you are practicing deception or are caught in a lie. 
In such cases it is to your advantage to argue with all the conviction you 
can muster. Draw the other person into an argument to distract them from 
your deceptive move. When caught in a lie, the more emotional and cer¬ 
tain you appear, the less likely it seems that you are lying. 

This technique has saved the hide of many a con artist. Once Count 
Victor Lusttg, swindler par excellence, had sold dozens of suckers around 
die country a phony box with which he claimed to be able to copy money. 
Discovering their mistake, the suckers generally chose not to go the police, 
rather than risk the embarrassment of publicity. But one Sheriff Richards, 



of Remsen Comity, Oklahoma, was not the kind of man to accept being 
conned out of $10,000, and one morning he tracked Lustig down to a hotel 
in Chicago. 

Lustig heard a knock on the door. When he opened it he was looking 
down the barrel of a gun. “What seems to be the problem?” he calmly 
asked. “You son of a bitch,” yelled the sheriff, “I’m going to kill you. You 
conned me with that damn box of yours!” Lustig feigned confusion. “You 
mean it’s not working?” he asked, “You know it’s not working,” replied the 
sheriff. “But that’s impossible,” said Lustig. “There’s no way it couldn’t be 
working. Did you operate it properly?” “I did exactly what you told me to 
do,” said the sheriff. “No, you must have done something wrong,” said 
Lustig. The argument went in circles. The barrel of the gun was gently low¬ 
ered. 

Lustig next went to phase two in the argument tactic: He poured out a 
whole bunch of technical gobbledygook about the box’s operation, com¬ 
pletely beguiling the sheriff, who now appeared less sure of himself and ar¬ 
gued less forcefully. “Look,” said Lustig, “I’ll give you your money back 
right now. I’ll also give you written instructions on how to work the ma¬ 
chine and I’ll come out to Oklahoma to make sure it’s working properly. 
There’s no way you can lose on that,” The sheriff reluctantly agreed. To 
satisfy him totally, Lustig took out a hundred one-hundred-dollar bills and 
gave them to him, telling him to relax and have a fun weekend in Chicago. 
Calmer and a little confused, the sheriff finally left. Over the next few days 
Lustig checked the paper every morning. He finally found what he was 
looking for: A short article reporting Sheriff Richards’s arrest, trial, and 
conviction for passing counterfeit notes. Lustig had won the argument; the 
sheriff never bothered him again. 



LAW 


10 


INFECTION: AVOID THE 
UNHAPPY AND UNLUCKY 


JUDGMENT 

You can die from someone dse’s misery—emotional states 
are as infectious as diseases. You may feel you an help¬ 
ing the drowning mam hut you are only precipitating 
your awn disaster. The unfortunate sometimes draw mis¬ 
fortune on themselves; they will also draw it on you. As¬ 
sociate with the happy and fortunate instead. 



TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

Bom in limerick, Ireland, in 1818, Marie Gilbert came to Paris in die 
1840s to make her fortune as a dancer and performer. Taking the name 
Lola Montez (her mother was of distant Spanish descent), she claimed to 
be a flamenco dancer from Spain. By 1845 her career was languishing, and 
to survive she became a courtesan—quickly one of the more successful in 
Paris. 

Only one man could salvage Lola’s dancing career: Alexandre Du- 
jarier, owner of the newspaper with the largest circulation in France, and 
also the newspaper’s drama critic. She decided to woo and conquer him. 
Investigating his habits, she discovered that he went riding every morning. 
An excellent horsewoman herself, she rode out one morning and “acciden¬ 
tally” ran into him. Soon they were riding together every day. A few weeks 
later Lola moved into his apartment. 

For a while the two were happy together. With Dujarier’s help, Lola 
began to revive her dancing career. Despite the risk to his social standing, 
Dujarier told friends he would marry her in the spring. (Lola had never 
told him that she had eloped at age nineteen with an Englishman, and was 
still legally married.) Although Dujarier was deeply in love, his life started 
to slide downhill. 

His fortunes in business changed and influential friends began to avoid 
him. One night Dujarier was invited to a party, attended by some of the 
wealthiest young men in Paris. Lola wanted to go too but he would not 
allow it. They had their first quarrel, and Dujarier attended the party by 
himself. There, hopelessly drunk, he insulted an influential drama critic, 
jean-Baptiste Rosemond de Beauvallon, perhaps because of something the 
critic had said about Lola, The following morning Beauvallon challenged 
him to a duel. Beauvallon was one of the best pistol shots in France. Du¬ 
jarier tried to apologize, but the duel took place, and he was shot and 
killed. Thus ended the life of one of the most promising young men of 
Paris society, Devastated, Lola left Paris. 

In 1846 Lola Montez found herself in Munich, where she decided to 
woo and conquer King Ludwig of Bavaria, The best way to Ludwig, she 
discovered, was through his aide-de-camp. Count Otto von Rechberg, a 
man with a fondness for pretty girls. One day when the count was break¬ 
fasting at an outdoor cafe, Lola rode by on her horse, was “accidentally” 
thrown from the saddle, and landed at Rechberg’s feet. The count rushed 
to help her and was enchanted. He promised to introduce her to Ludwig. 

Rechberg arranged an audience with the king for Lola, but when she 
arrived in the anteroom, she could hear the king saying he was too busy to 
meet a favor-seeking stranger. Lola pushed aside the sentries and entered 
his room anyway. In the process, the front of her dress somehow got tom 
(perhaps by her, perhaps by one of the sentries), and to the astonishment of 
all, most especially the king, her bare breasts were brazenly exposed. Lola 
was granted her audience with Ludwig. Fifty-five hours later she made her 
debut on the Bavarian stage; the reviews were terrible, but that did not stop 
Ludwig from arranging more performances. 


I I u: MT AM) TIH-, 
CAMI'AMIK 

A nut found itself 
carried by a crow to the 
top of it tall campanile, 
and by falling into a 
crevice succeeded in 
escaping its dread fate, 
ft then besought the 
wall to shelter it, by 
appealing to it by the 
grace, of God, and 
praising its height, and 
the beauty and noble 
tone of its bells. “Alas,” 
it went on, “as I have 
not been able to drop 
beneath the green 
branches of my old 
Father and to lie in the 
fallow earth covered by 
his fallen leaves, do 
you, at least, not aban¬ 
don me. When I found 
myself in the beak of 
the cruel crow l made a 
vow. that if l escaped / 
would end my life in a 
little hole. ” 

At these words, the 
wall, moved with 
compassion, was 
content to shelter the 
nut in the spot where it 
had fallen. Within a 
short time, the nut burst 
open: Its roots reached 
in between the crevices 
of (he stones and began 
to push them apart; its 
shoots pressed up 
toward the sky. They 
soon rose above, the 
building, and as the 
twisted roots grew 
thicker they began to 
thrust the walls apart 
and force, ilu: ancient 
stones from their old 
places. Then the wall, 
too late and in vain, 
bewailed the cause of 
its destruction, and in 
short time it fell in ruin. 

Leonardo da Vinc i. 
1452-1519 


LAW 10 77 



In his own time Simon 
Thomas was u great 
doctor l remember that 
/ happened to meet him 
one day at the home of 
a rich aid consumptive: 
He told his patient 
when discussing ways 
to cure him that one 
means was to provide 
occasions for me to 
enjoy his company: He 
could then fix his eyes 
on the freshness of my 
countenance and his 
thoughts on the over¬ 
flowing cheerfu (ness 
and vigor of my young 
manhood: by filling all 
his senses with the 
flower of my youth his 
condition might 
improve. He forgot to 
add that mine, might 
get worse. 

Montaiunf.. 
15.11.1592 


Many things are said to 
be in fee turns. Sleepi¬ 
ness can be infectious, 
and yawning as well. In 
large-scute strategy, 
when the enemy is 
agitated and .shows an 
inclination to rush, do 
not mind in the least. 

Make a show of 
complete calmness, and 
the enemy will he taken 
by this and will become 
relaxed. You infect (heir 
spirit. W>u can infect 
them with a carefree, 
drunklike spirit, with 
boredom, or even 
weakness. 

A HOOK O? VIVI- KINGS. 

M IYAMOTO Mv SASIU. 
XHVKNTKI’ NTII < 1 NTURY 


78 LAW 10 


Ludwig was, in his own words, “bewitched” by Lola. He started 
to appear in public with her on his arm, and then he bought and furnished 
an apartment for her on one of Munich’s most fashionable boulevards. Al¬ 
though he had been known as a miser, and was not given to flights of 
fancy, he started to shower Lola with gifts and to write poetry for her. Now 
his favored mistress, she catapulted to fame and fortune overnight 

Lola began to lose her sense of proportion. One day when she was out 
riding, an elderly man rode ahead of her, a bit too slowly for her liking. 
Unable to pass him, she began to slash him with her riding crop. On an¬ 
other occasion she took her dog, unleashed, out for a stroll. The dog at¬ 
tacked a passerby, but instead of helping the man get the dog away, she 
whipped him with the leash. Incidents like this infuriated the stolid citizens 
of Bavaria, but Ludwig stood by Lola and even had her naturalized as a 
Bavarian citizen. The king’s entourage tried to wake him to die dangers of 
the affair, but those who criticized Lola were summarily fired. 

While Bavarians who had loved their king now outwardly disre¬ 
spected him, Lola was made a countess, had a new palace built for herself, 
and began to dabble in politics, advising Ludwig on policy. She was the 
most powerful force in the kingdom. Her influence in the king’s cabinet 
continued to grow, and she treated the other ministers with disdain. As a 
result, riots broke out throughout the realm. A once peaceful land was vir¬ 
tually in the grip of civil war, and students everywhere were chanting, 
“Raus mil Lola!” 

By February of 1848, Ludwig was finally unable to withstand the pres¬ 
sure. With great sadness he ordered Lola to leave Bavaria immediately. 
She left, but not until she was paid off. For the next five weeks the Bavari¬ 
ans’ wrath was turned against their formerly beloved king. In March of that 
year he was forced to abdicate. 

Lola Montez moved to England. More than anything she needed re¬ 
spectability, and despite being married (she still had not arranged a divorce 
from the Englishman she had wed years before), she set her sights on 
George Trafford Heald, a promising young army officer who w as the son of 
an influential barrister. Although he was ten years younger than Lola, and 
could have chosen a wife among the prettiest and wealthiest young girls of 
English society, Heald fell under her spell. They were married in 1849. 
Soon arrested on the charge of bigamy, she skipped bail, and she and 
Heald made their way to Spain. They quarreled horribly and on one occa¬ 
sion Lola slashed him with a knife. Finally, she drove him away. Returning 
to England, he found he had lost his position in the army. Ostracized from 
English society, he moved to Portugal, where he lived in poverty. After a 
few months his short life ended in a boating accident. 

A few years later the man who published Lola Montez’s autobiogra¬ 
phy went bankrupt 

In 1853 Lola moved to California, where she met and married a man 
named Pat Hull. Their relationship was as stormy as all the others, and she 
left Hull for another man. He took to drink and fell into a deep depression 
that lasted until he died, four years later, still a relatively young man. 



At the age of forty-one, Lola gave away her clothes and finery and 
turned to God. She toured America, lecturing on religious topics, dressed 
in white and wearing a halolike white headgear. She died two years later, in 
1861. 

Interpretation 

Lola Montez attracted men with her wiles, but her power over them went 
beyond the sexual. It was through the force of her character that she kept 
her lovers enthralled. Men were sucked into the maelstrom she churned up 
around her. They felt confused, upset, but the strength of the emotions she 
stirred also made them feel more alive. 

As is often the case with infection, the problems would only arise over 
time. Lola's Inherent instability would begin to get under her lovers’ skin. 
They would find themselves drawn into her problems, but their emotional 
attachment to her would make them want to help her. This was the crucial 
point of the disease—for Lola Montez could not be helped. Her problems 
were too deep. Once the lover identified with them, he was lost. He would 
find himself embroiled in quarrels. The infection would spread to his fam¬ 
ily and friends, or, in the case of Ludwig, to an entire nation. The only so¬ 
lution would be to cut her off, or suffer an eventual collapse. 

The infectmg-character type is not restricted to women; it has nothing 
to do with gender. It stems from an inward instability that radiates outward, 
drawing disaster upon itself. There is almost a desire to destroy and unset¬ 
tle. You could spend a lifetime studying the pathology of infecting charac¬ 
ters, but don’t waste your time—just learn the lesson. When you suspect 
you are in the presence of an infector, don’t argue, don’t try to help, don’t 
pass the person on to your friends, or you will become enmeshed. Flee the 
infector’s presence or suffer the consequences. 

Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look . He thinks too much. . . . 

I do not know the man I should avoid so soon as that spare Cassius . . . . 

Such men as he he never at heart's ease whiles they behold a greater 
than themselves, and therefore are they very dangerous. 

Julius Caesar, William Shakespeare . 1564-1616 


Regard no foolish man 
as cultured, though you 
may reckon a gifted 
man as wise; and 
esteem no ignorant 
abstainer a true ascetic. 
Do not consort with 
fools, especially those 
who consider them- 
selves wise. And be not 
self-satisfied with your 
own ignorance. Let 
your intercourse he 
only with men of good 
repute; for it is by such 
association that men 
themselves attain to 
good repute. Do you 
not observe how 
sesame-oil is mingled 
with roses or violets 
and how , when it has' 
been for some time in 
association with roses 
or violets, it ceases to 
be sesame-oil and is 
called oil of roses or oil 
of violets ? 

A MIRROR FOR PR INCUS, 

Kai Ka’us !bn 
ISKAND.AR, 

ELEVENTH CENTURY 


KEYS TO POWER 

Those misfortunates among us who have been brought down by circum¬ 
stances beyond their control deserve all the help and sympathy we can 
give them. But there are others who are not bom to misfortune or unhappi¬ 
ness, but who draw it upon themselves by their destructive actions and un¬ 
settling effect on others. It would be a great thing if we could raise them up, 
change their patterns, but more often than not it is their patterns that end 
up getting inside and changing us. The reason is simple—humans are ex¬ 
tremely susceptible to the moods, emotions, and even the ways of thinking 
of those with whom they spend their time. 

The incurably unhappy and unstable have a particularly strong infect- 


LAW 10 


79 



mg power because their characters and emotions are so intense. They often 
present themselves as victims, making it difficult, at first, to see their mis¬ 
eries as self-inflicted. Before you realize the real nature of their problems 
you have been infected by them. 

Understand this: In the game of power, the people you associate with 
are critical. The risk of associating with infectors is that you will waste valu¬ 
able time and energy trying to free yourself. Through a kind of guilt by as¬ 
sociation, you will also suffer in the eyes of others. Never underestimate the 
dangers of infection. 

There are many kinds of infector to be aware of, but one of the most 
insidious is the sufferer from chronic dissatisfaction. Cassius, the Roman 
conspirator against Julius Caesar, had the discontent that comes from deep 
envy. He simply could not endure the presence of anyone of greater talent. 
Probably because Caesar sensed the man’s interminable sourness, he 
passed him up for the position of first praetorship, and gave the position to 
Brutus instead. Cassius brooded and brooded, his hatred for Caesar be¬ 
coming pathological. Brutus himself, a devoted republican, disliked Cae¬ 
sar’s dictatorship; had he had the patience to wait, he would have become 
the first man in Rome after Caesar’s death, and could have undone the evil 
that the leader had wrought. But Cassius infected him with his own rancor, 
bending his ear daily with tales of Caesar’s evil. He finally won Brutus over 
to the conspiracy. It was the beginning of a great tragedy. How many mis¬ 
fortunes could have been avoided had Brutus learned to fear the power of 
infection. 

There is only one solution to infection: quarantine. But by the time 
you recognize the problem it is often too late. A Lola Montez overwhelms 
you with her forceful personality. Cassius intrigues you with his confiding 
nature and the depth of his feelings. How can you protect yourself against 
such insidious viruses? The answer lies in judging people on the effects 
Urey have on the world and not on the reasons they give for their prob- 
Image: A Virus. Unseen, it 

lems. Infectors can be recognized by the misfortune they draw on them- 
enters your pores without 

selves, their turbulent past, their long line of broken relationships, their un- 
warning, spreading silently and 

stable careers, and the very force of their character, which sweeps you up 
slowly. Before you are aware of 

and makes you lose your reason. Be forewarned by these signs of an infec- 
the infection, it is deep inside you. 

tor; learn to see the discontent in their eye. Most important of all, do not 
take pity. Do not enmesh yourself in trying to help. The infector will re¬ 
main unchanged, but you will be unhinged. 

The other side of infection is equally valid, and perhaps more readily 
understood: There are people who attract happiness to themselves by their 
good cheer, natural buoyancy, and intelligence. They are a source of plea¬ 
sure, and you must associate with them to share in the prosperity they draw 
upon themselves. 



This applies to more than good cheer and success: All positive quali¬ 
ties can infect us. Talleyrand had many strange and intimidating traits, but 
most agreed that he surpassed all Frenchmen in graciousness, aristocratic 
charm, and wit. Indeed he came from one of the oldest noble families in 
the country, and despite his belief in democracy and the French Republic, 
he retained his courtly manners. His contemporary Napoleon was in many 
ways the opposite—a peasant from Corsica, taciturn and ungracious, even 
violent. 

There was no one Napoleon admired more than Talleyrand. He en¬ 
vied his minister’s way with people, his wit and his ability to charm 
women, and as best he could, he kept Talleyrand around him, hoping to 
soak up the culture he lacked. There is no doubt that Napoleon changed as 
his rule continued. Many of the rough edges were smoothed by his con¬ 
stant association with Talleyrand. 

Use the positive side of this emotional osmosis to advantage. If, for ex¬ 
ample, you are miserly by nature, you will never go beyond a certain limit; 
only generous souls attain greatness. Associate with the generous, then, 
and they will infect you, opening up everything that is tight and restricted 
in you. If you are gloomy, gravitate to the cheerful. If you are prone to iso¬ 
lation, force yourself to befriend the gregarious. Never associate with those 
who share your defects—they will reinforce everything that holds you 
back. Only create associations with positive affinities. Make this a rule of 
life and you will benefit more than from all the therapy in the world. 


Authority: Recognize the fortu¬ 
nate so that you may choose 
their company, and the unfortu¬ 
nate so that you may avoid 
them. Misfortune is usually the 
crime of folly, and among those 
who suffer from it there is no 
malady more contagious: Never 
open your door to the least of 
misfortunes, for, if you do, many 
others will follow in its train.... 
Do not die of another’s misery. 
(Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658) 


REVERSAL 

This law' admits of no reversal. Its application is universal. There is nothing 
to be gained by associating with those who infect you with their misery; 
there is only power and good fortune to be obtained by associating with 
the fortunate. Ignore this law' at your peril. 



LAW 



LEARN TO KEEP PEOPLE 
DEPENDENT ON YOU 


JUDGMENT 

To maintain your independence you must ahvays be 
needed and wanted . The more you aw relied on, the mow 
freedom you have. Make people depend on you for their 
happiness and prosperity and you have nothing to fear 
Never teach them enough so that they can do without you. 




TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

Sometime in the Middle Ages, a mercenary soldier (a condottiere), whose 
name has not been recorded, saved the town of Siena from a foreign ag¬ 
gressor. How could the good citizens of Siena reward him? No amount of 
money or honor could possibly compare in value to the preservation of a 
city’s liberty. The citizens thought of making the mercenary the lord of the 
city, but even that, they decided, wasn’t recompense enough. At last one of 
them stood before the assembly called to debate this matter and said, “Let 
us kill him and then worship him as our patron saint.” And so they did. 

The Count of Carmagnola was cue of the bravest and most successful 
of all the condottieri. In 1442, late in his life, he was in the employ of the city 
of Venice, which was in the midst of a long war with Florence. The count 
was suddenly recalled to Venice. A favorite of the people, he was received 
there with all kinds of honor and splendor. That evening he was to dine 
with the doge himself, in the doge’s palace. On the way into the palace, 
however, he noticed that the guard was leading him in a different direction 
from usual. Crossing the famous Bridge of Sighs, he suddenly realized 
where they were taking him—to the dungeon. He was convicted on a 
trumped-up charge and the next day in the Piazza San Marco, before a 
horrified crowd who could not understand how his fate had changed so 
drastically, he was beheaded. 

Interpretation 

Many of the great condottieri of Renaissance Italy suffered the same fate as 
the patron saint of Siena and the Count of Carmagnola: They won battle 
after battle for their employers only to find themselves banished, impris¬ 
oned, or executed. The problem was not ingratitude; it was that there were 
so many other condottieri as able and valiant as they were. They were re¬ 
placeable. Nothing was lost by killing them. Meanwhile, the older among 
them had grown powerful themselves, and wanted more and more money 
for their services. How much better, then, to do away with them and hire a 
younger, cheaper mercenary. That was the fate of the Count of Carma¬ 
gnola, who had started to act impudendy and independently. He had taken 
his power for granted without making sure that he was truly indispensable. 

Such is the fate (to a less violent degree, one hopes) of those who do 
not make others dependent on them. Sooner or later someone comes along 
who can do the job as well as they can—someone younger, fresher, less ex¬ 
pensive, less threatening. 

Be the only one who can do what you do, and make the fate of those who 
hire you so entwined with yours that they cannot possibly get rid of you. 
Otherwise you will someday be forced to cross your own Bridge of Sighs. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

When Otto von Bismarck became a deputy in the Prussian parliament in 
1847, he was thirty-two years old and without an ally or friend. Looking 


Till: TWO NORSKS 

Two horses won’ carry¬ 
ing ih’O toads. The trout 
Horse went weft, hut 
the rear Horse hvvv 
lazy. The men began to 
pile the rear Horse's 
load on the front 
Horse; when they had 
transferred it all the 
rear Horse found it 
easy going, and he said 
to the front Horse: 

“ Toil and sweat! The 
more von try, the more 
you have to suffer." 
When they reached the 
tavern, the owner said: 

“Why should / fodder 
two horses when / 
carry all on one? I had 
better give the one all 
the food it wants, and 
cut the throat of the 
other: at least / shall 
have the hide." And so 
he did 

i Ain.rs. 

Lrin Tolstoy. 

182K-19U) 


LAW II ! S3 



THi CAT THAT ViAi.KiJ) 
in imisii.i- 

Then the Woman 
laughed and set the Cat 
a bowl of the warm 
white milk and said, “O 
Cat , you are as clever 
as a man, but remem¬ 
ber that your bargain 
was not made with the 
Man or the Dog, and I 
do not know what they 
will do when they come 
home ." “ What is that to 
me?'’ said the Cal. “If f 
have my plat e in the 
Cave by the fire and mv 
warm white milk three 
times a day * l do not 
care what the Man or 

the Dog can do." 
... And from that day 
tv this. Best Beloved, 
three proper Men out 
of five will always 
throw things at a Cat 
whenever they meet 
him. and all proper 
Dogs will chase him up 
a tree. But the Cat 
keeps his side, of the 
bargain too. He will kill 
mice, and he will be 
kind to Babies when he 
is in (he house, just as 
long as they do not pull 
his tail too hard. But 
when he has done that . 
and between times , and 
when the moon gets up 
and the night comes, he 
is the Cat that walks by 
himself, and all places 
are alike to him. Then 
he goes out to the Wet 
Wild Woods or up the 
Wet Wild Trees or on 
the Wet Wild Roofs, 
waving his wild tail 
and walking by his 
wild lone. 

JUST SO S'!GRIPS, 

Ruoyaro Kipling, 
1865-1936 


around him, he decided that the side to ally himself with was not the par¬ 
liament’s liberals or conservatives, not any particular minister, and cer¬ 
tainly not the people. It was with the king, Frederick William IV, This was 
an odd choice to say the least, for Frederick was at a low point of his power. 
A weak, indecisive man, he consistently gave in to the liberals in parlia¬ 
ment; in fact he was spineless, and stood for much that Bismarck disliked, 
personally and politically. Yet Bismarck courted Frederick night and day. 
When other deputies attacked the king for his many inept moves, only Bis¬ 
marck stood by him. 

Finally, it all paid off: In 1851 Bismarck was made a minister in the 
king’s cabinet. Now he went to work. Time and again he forced the king’s 
hand, getting him to build up the military, to stand up to the liberals, to do 
exactly as Bismarck wished. He worked on Frederick’s insecurity about his 
manliness, challenging him to be firm and to rule with pride. And he 
slowly restored the king’s powers until the monarchy was once again the 
most powerful force in Prussia. 

When Frederick died, in 1861, his brother William assumed the 
throne. William disliked Bismarck intensely and had no intention of keep¬ 
ing him around. But he also inherited the same situation his brother had: 
enemies galore, who wanted to nibble his power away. He actually consid¬ 
ered abdicating, feeling he lacked the strength to deal with this dangerous 
and precarious position. But Bismarck insinuated himself once again. He 
stood by the new king, gave him strength, and urged him into firm and de¬ 
cisive action. The king grew dependent on Bismarck’s strong-arm tactics to 
keep his enemies at bay, and despite his antipathy toward the man, he soon 
made him his prime minister. The two quarreled often over policy— 
Bismarck was much more conservative—but the king understood his own 
dependency. Whenever the prime minister threatened to resign, the king 
gave in to him, time after time. It was in fact Bismarck who set state policy. 

Years later, Bismarck’s actions as Prussia’s prime minister led the vari¬ 
ous German state* to be united into one country. Now Bismarck finagled 
the king into letting himself be crowned emperor of Germany. Yet it was 
really Bismarck who had reached the heights of power. As right-hand man 
to the emperor, and as imperial chancellor and knighted prince, he pulled 
all the levers. 

Interpretation 

Most young and ambitious politicians looking out on the political landscape 
of 1840s Germany would have tried to build a power base among those 
with the most power. Bismarck saw different. Joining forces with the pow¬ 
erful can be foolish: They will swallow you up, just as the doge of Venice 
swallowed up the Grunt of Carmagnola. No one will come to depend on 
you if they are already strong. If you are ambitious, it is much wiser to seek 
out weak rulers or masters with whom you can create a relationship of de¬ 
pendency. You become their strength, their intelligence, their spine. What 
power you hold! If they got rid of you the whole edifice would collapse. 


84 \ LAW 11 



Necessity rules the world. People rarely act unless compelled to. If you 
create no need for yourself, then you will be done away with at first oppor¬ 
tunity. If, on the other hand, you understand the Laws of Power and make 
others depend on you for their welfare, if you can counteract their weak¬ 
ness with your own “iron and blood,” in Bismarck’s phrase, then you will 
survive your masters as Bismarck did. You will have all the benefits of 
power without the thorns that come from being a master. 

Thus a wise prince will think of ways to keep his citizens of every sort 
and under every circumstance dependent on the state and on him; 
and then they will always be trustworthy. 

Niccolo Machiavelli, 1469-1527 


KEYS TO POWER 

The ultimate power is the power to get people to do as you wish. When you 
can do this without having to force people or hurt them, when they will¬ 
ingly grant you what you desire, then your power is untouchable. The best 
way to achieve this position is to create a relationship of dependence. The 
master requires your services; he is weak, or unable to function without 
you; you have enmeshed yourself in his work so deeply that doing away 
with you would bring him great difficulty, or at least would mean valuable 
time lost in training another to replace you. Once such a relationship is es¬ 
tablished you have the upper hand, die leverage to make the master do as 
you wish. It is the classic case of the man behind the throne, the servant of 
the king who actually controls the king. Bismarck did not have to bully ei¬ 
ther Frederick or William into doing his bidding. He simply made it clear 
that unless he got what he wanted he would walk away, leaving the king to 
twist in the wind. Both kings soon danced to Bismarck’s time. 

Do not be one of the many who mistakenly believe that the ultimate 
form of power is independence. Power involves a relationship between 
people; you will always need others as allies, pawns, or even as weak mas¬ 
ters who serve as your front. The completely independent man would live 
in a cabin in the woods—he would have the freedom to come and go as he 
pleased, but he would have no power. The best you can hope for is that 
others will grow so dependent on you that you enjoy a kind of reverse in¬ 
dependence: Their need for you frees you. 

Louis XI (1423-1483), the great Spider King of France, had a weak¬ 
ness for astrology. He kept a court astrologer whom he admired, until one 
day the man predicted that a lady of the court would die within eight days. 
When the prophecy came true, Louis was terrified, thinking that either the 
man had murdered the woman to prove his accuracy or that he was so 
versed in his science that his powers threatened Louis himself. In either 
case he had to be killed. 

One evening Louis summoned the astrologer to his room, high in the 
castle. Before the man arrived, the king told his servants that when he gave 


mi. k!.m run: and 

Till; VINK 

An extravagant young 
Vine, vainly ambitious 
of independence, and 
fond of rambling at 
large, despised the 
alliance of a stately elm 
that grew near .; and 
courted her embraces. 
Having risen to some 
small height without 
any kind of support, 
she shot forth her 
flimsy branches to a 
very uncommon and 
superfluous length; 
calling on her neigh¬ 
bour to take notice how 
hide she wanted his 
assistance. "Poor infat¬ 
uated shrub, ” replied 
the elm. "how inconsis¬ 
tent is thy conduct! 
Wouldst thou be truly 
independent, thou 
shouldst carefully 
apply those juices to 
the enlargement of thy 
stem, which thou 
lavishest in vain upon 
unnecessary foliage, f 
shortly shall behold 
thee grovelling on the 
ground; yet counte¬ 
nanced, indeed , by 
many of the human 
race, who, intoxicated 
with vanity, have 
despised economy; and 
who. to Support for a 
moment their empty 
boast of independence, 
have exhausted the 
very source of it in friv¬ 
olous expenses ." 

FABLES, 

Robert Dodslhy, 
1703-1764 


LAW 11 | 85 



the signal they were to pick the astrologer up, carry him to the window, 
and hurl him to the ground, hundreds of feet below. 

The astrologer soon arrived, but before giving the signal, Louis de¬ 
cided to ask him one last question: “You claim to understand astrology and 
to know the fate of others, so tell me what your fate will be and how long 
you have to live.” 

W I shall die just three days before Your Majesty,” the astrologer replied. 
The king's signal was never given. The man’s life was spared. The Spider 
King not only protected his astrologer for as long as he was alive, he lav¬ 
ished him with gifts and had him tended by the finest court doctors. 

The astrologer survived Louis by several years, disproving his power 
of prophecy but proving his mastery of power. 

This is the model: Make others dependent on you. To get rid of you 
might spell disaster, even death, and your master dares not tempt fate by 
finding out. There are many ways to obtain such a position. Foremost 
among them is to possess a talent and creative skill that simply cannot be 
replaced. 

During the Renaissance, the major obstacle to a painter’s success was 
finding the right patron. Michelangelo did this better than anyone else: His 
patron was Pope Julius II. But he and the pope quarreled over the building 
of the pope’s marble tomb, and Michelangelo left Rome in disgust To the 
amazement of those in the pope’s circle, not only did the pope not fire him, 
he sought him out and in his own haughty way begged the artist to stay 
Michelangelo, he knew, could find another patron, but he could never find 
another Michelangelo. 

You do not have to have the talent of a Michelangelo; you do have to 
have a skill that sets you apart from the crowd. You should create a situa¬ 
tion in which you can always latch on to another master or patron but your 
master cannot easily find another servant with your particular talent. And 
if, in reality, you are not actually indispensable, you must find a way to 
make it look as if you are. Having the appearance of specialized knowledge 
and skill gives you leeway in your ability to deceive those above you into 
thinking they cannot do without you. Real dependence on your master’s 
part, however, leaves him more vulnerable to you than the faked variety, 
and it is always within your power to make your skill indispensable. 

This is what is meant by the intertwining of fates: Like creeping ivy, 
you have wrapped yourself around the source of power, so that it would 
cause great trauma to cut you away. And you do not necessarily have to en¬ 
twine yourself around the master; another person will do, as long as he or 
she too is indispensable in die chain. 

One day Harry Cohn, president of Columbia Pictures, was visited in 
his office by a gloomy group of his executives. It was 1951, when the witch¬ 
hunt against Communists in Hollywood, carried on by the U.S. Congress’s 
House Un-American Activities Committee, was at its height. The execu¬ 
tives had bad news: One of their employees, the screenwriter John Howard 
Lawson, had been singled out as a Communist They had to get rid of him 
right away or suffer the wrath of the committee. 



Harry Cohn was no bleeding-heart liberal; in fact, he had always been 
a die-hard Republican. 

His favorite politician was Benito Mussolini, whom he had once vis¬ 
ited, and whose framed photo hung on his wall. If there was someone he 
hated Cohn would call him a “Communist bastard. 1 ' But to the executives 1 
amazement Cohn told them he would not fire Lawson. He did not keep the 
screenwriter on because he was a good writer—there were many good 
writers in Hollywood. He kept him because of a chain of dependence: 
Lawson was Humphrey Bogart's writer and Bogart was Columbia’s star. If 
Cohn messed with Lawson he would ruin an immensely profitable rela¬ 
tionship. That was worth more than the terrible publicity brought to him 
by his defiance of the committee. 

Henry Kissinger managed to survive the many bloodlettings that went 
on in the Nixon White House not because he was the best diplomat Nixon 
could find—-there were other fine negotiators—and not because the two 
men got along so well: They did not. Nor did they share their beliefs and 
politics. Kissinger survived because he entrenched himself in so many 
areas of the political structure that to do away with him would lead to 
chaos. Michelangelo's power was intensive, depending on one skill, his abil¬ 
ity as an artist; Kissinger’s was extensive. He got himself involved in so 
many aspects and departments of the administration that his involvement 
became a card in his hand. It also made him many allies. If you can 
arrange such a position for yourself, getting rid of you becomes 
dangerous—all sorts of interdependencies will unravel. Still, the intensive 
form of power provides more freedom than the extensive, because those 
who have it depend on no particular master, or particular position of 
power, for their security. 

To make others dependent on you, one route to take is the secret- 
intelligence tactic. By knowing other people’s secrets, by holding informa¬ 
tion that they wouldn’t want broadcast, you seal your fate with theirs. You 
are untouchable. Ministers of secret police have held this position through¬ 
out the ages: They can make or break a king, or, as in the case of J. Edgar 
Hoover, a president. But the role is so full of insecurities and paranoia that 
the power it provides almost cancels itself out. Ydu cannot rest at ease, and 
what good is power if it brings you no peace? 

One last warning: Do not imagine that your master's dependence on 
you will make him love you. In fact, he may resent and fear you. But, as 
Machiavelli said, it is better to be feared than loved. Fear you can control; 
love, never. Depending on an emotion as subtle and changeable as love or 
friendship will only make you insecure. Better to have others depend on 
you out of fear of the consequences of losing you than out of love of your 
company. 



Image: Vines with Many Thorns, Below, the roots grow deep 
and wide. Above, the vines push through bushes, entwine themselves 

around trees and poles and window ledges. To get rid of them 
would cost such toil and blood, it is easier to let them climb. 


Authority: Make people depend on 
you. More is to be gained from 
such dependence than courtesy. He 
who has slaked his thirst, immedi¬ 
ately turns his back on the well, 
no longer needing it. When depen¬ 
dence disappears, so does civility 
and decency, and then respect. 
The first lesson which experience 
should teach you is to keep hope 
alive but never satisfied, keeping 
even a royal patron ever in need of 
you. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658) 


REVERSAL 

The weakness of making others depend on you is that you are in some 
measure dependent on them. But trying to move beyond that point means 
getting rid of those above you—it means standing alone, depending on no 
one. Such is the monopolistic drive of a J. P. Morgan or a John D. Rocke¬ 
feller—to drive out all competition, to be in complete control. If you can 
comer the market, so much the better. 

No such independence comes without a price. You are forced to isolate 
yourself. Monopolies often turn inward and destroy themselves from the in¬ 
ternal pressure. They also stir up powerful resentment, making their ene¬ 
mies bond together to fight them. The drive for complete control is often 
ruinous and fruitless. Interdependence remains the law, independence a 
rare and often fatal exception. Better to place yourself in a position of mu¬ 
tual dependence, then, and to follow this critical law rather than look for its 
reversal. You will not have the unbearable pressure of being on top, and the 
master above you will in essence be your slave, for he will depend on you. 


SS ; LAW II 



LAW 


12 

USE SELECTIVE HONESTY 
AND GENEROSITY TO 
DISARM YOUR VICTIM 

« 

JUDGMENT 

One sincere and honest move will cover over dozens of 
dishonest ones , Open-hearted gestures of honesty and 
generosity bring down the guard of even the most suspi¬ 
cious people . Once your selective honesty opens a hole in 
their armor, you can deceive and manipulate them at 
will A timely gift—a Trojan horse—will serve the same 
purpose . 



tHANCKSCO liOKKl 
Cm H I IKK CIIAHI VIAN 

Francesco Giuseppe 
Born of Milan, whose 
death in 1695 fell just 
within the seventeenth 
century... was a fore¬ 
runner o f that special 
type of eh aria tan i cal 
adventurer, the cour¬ 
tier or "cavalier' 
impostor.... 11 is real 
period of glory began 
after he moved to 
Amsterdam. There he. 
assumed the title of 
Medico Universale. 
maintained a great 
retinue, and drove 
about in a coach with 
six horses ... Tat rents 
streamed to him, and 
some invalids had 
themselves carried in 
sedan, chairs all the way 
from Paris to his place 
in Amsterdam. Borri 
took no payment for 
his consultations: He 
distributed great stuns 
among the poor and 
was never known to 
receive any money 
through the post or 
bills of exchange. As- he 
continued to live with 
such splendor, never¬ 
theless, it was presumed 
that he possessed the 
philosophers ’ stone. 
Suddenly this benefac¬ 
tor disappeared from 
Amsterdam. Then if 
was discovered that he 
had taken with him 
money and diamonds 
that had been placed 
in his charge. 
■nui 1 ‘owi-r or 

Till? ('HAW. AT AN. 

Gw?it; w. Franit SCO, 
I ¥39 


90 j LAW 12 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

Sometime in 1926, a tall, dapperly dressed man paid a visit to A1 Capone, 
the most feared gangster of his time. Speaking with an elegant Continental 
accent, the man introduced himself as Count Victor Lustig, He promised 
that if Capone gave him $50,1X10 he could double it, Capone had more 
than enough funds to cover the “investment,” but he wasn’t in the habit of 
entrusting large sums to total strangers. He looked the count over: Some¬ 
thing about the man was different—his classy style, his manner—and so 
Capone decided to play along. He counted out {he bills personally and 
handed them to Lustig. “Okay, Count,” said Capone. “Double it in sixty 
days like you said.” Lustig left with the money, put it in a safe-deposit box 
in Chicago, then headed to New York, where he had several other money¬ 
making schemes in progress. 

The $50,000 remained in the bank box untouched. Lustig made no ef¬ 
fort to double it. Two months later he returned to Chicago, took the money 
from the box, and paid Capone another visit. He looked at the gangster’s 
stony-faced bodyguards, smiled apologetically, and said, “Please accept my 
profound regrets, Mr. Capone. I’m sorry to report that the plan failed ... I 
failed,” 

Capone slowly stood up. He glowered at Lustig, debating which part 
of the river to throw him in. But the count reached into his coat pocket, 
withdrew the $50,000, and placed it on the desk. “Here, sir, is your money, 
to the penny. Again, my sincere apologies. This is most embarrassing. 
Things didn’t work out the way I thought they would. I would have loved 
to have doubled your money for you and for myself—Lord knows I need 
it—but the plan just didn’t materialize.” 

Capone sagged back into his chair, confused. “I know you’re a con 
man, Count,” said Capone. “I knew it the moment you walked in here. I 
expected either one hundred thousand dollars or nothing. But this ... get¬ 
ting my money back . . . well.” “Again my apologies, Mr. Capone,” said 
Lustig, as he picked up his hat and began to leave. “My God! You’re hon¬ 
est!” yelled Capone. “If you’re on the spot, here’s five to help you along.” 
He counted out five one-thousand-dollar bills out of the $50,000. The 
count seemed stunned, bowed deeply, mumbled his thanks, and left, tak¬ 
ing the money. 

The $5,000 was what Lustig had been after all along. 

Interpretation 

Count Victor Lustig, a man who spoke several languages and prided him¬ 
self on his refinement and culture, was one of the great con artists of mod¬ 
em times. He was known for his audacity, his fearlessness, and, most 
important, his knowledge of human psychology. He could size up a man in 
minutes, discovering his weaknesses, and he had radar for suckers. Lustig 
knew that most men build up defenses against crooks and other trouble¬ 
makers. The con artist’s job is to bring those defenses down. 

One sure way to do this is through an act of apparent sincerity and 
honesty. Who will distrust a person literally caught in the act of being hon- 



est? Lustig used selective honesty many times, but with Capone he went a 
step farther. No normal con man would have dared such a con; he would 
have chosen his suckers for their meekness, for that look about them that 
says they will take their medicine without complaint. Con Capone and you 
would spend the rest of your life (whatever remained of it) afraid. But 
Lustig understood that a man like Capone spends his life nfistrustmg oth¬ 
ers. No one around him is honest or generous, and being so much in the 
company of wolves is exhausting, even depressing. A man like Capone 
yearns to be the recipient of an honest or generous gesture, to feel that not 
everyone has an angle or is out to rob him. 

Lustig’s act of selective honesty disarmed Capone because it was so 
unexpected. A con artist loves conflicting emotions like these, since the 
person caught up in them is so easily distracted and deceived. 

Do not shy away from practicing this law on the Capones of the world. 
With a well-timed gesture of honesty or generosity, you will have die most 
brutal and cynical beast in the kingdom eating out of your hand. 

Everything turns gray when I don’t have at least one mark on the horizon. 

Life then seems empty and depressing. I cannot understand honest men. 

They lead desperate lives, full of boredom. 

(iouvf l iitor LttMig, ld90-194 7 


KEYS TO POWER 

The essence of deception is distraction. Distracting the people you want to 
deceive gives you the time and space to do something they won't notice. 
An act of kindness, generosity, or honesty is often the most powerful form 
of distraction because it disarms other people’s suspicions. It turns them 
into children, eagerly lapping up any kind of affectionate gesture. 

In ancient China this was called “giving before you take”—the giving 
makes it hard for the other person to notice the taking. It is a device with 
infinite practical uses. Brazenly taking something from someone is danger¬ 
ous, even for the powerful. The victim will plot revenge. It is also danger¬ 
ous simply to ask for what you need, no matter how politely: Unless the 
other person sees some gain for themselves, they may come to resent your 
neediness. Learn to give before you take. It softens the ground, takes the 
bite out of a future request, or simply creates a distraction. And the giving 
can take many forms: an actual gift, a generous act, a kind favor, an “hon¬ 
est” admission—whatever it takes. 

Selective honesty is best employed on your first encounter with some¬ 
one. We are all creatures of habit, and our first impressions last a long time. 
If someone believes you are honest at the start of your relationship it takes 
a lot to convince them otherwise. This gives you room to maneuver. 

Jay Gould, like A1 Capone, was a man who distrusted everyone. 
By the time he was thirty-three he was already a multimillionaire, 
mostly through deception and strong-arming. In the late 1860s, Gould in¬ 
vested heavily in the Erie Railroad, then discovered that the market had 



been flooded with a vast amount of phony stock certificates for the com- 
pany. He stood to lose a fortune and to suffer a lot of embarrassment. 

In the midst of this crisis, a man named Lord John Gordon-Gordon of¬ 
fered to help. Gordon-Gordon, a Scottish lord, had apparently made a 
small fortune investing in railroads. 

By hiring some handwriting experts "Gordon-Gordon was able to 
prove to Gould that the culprits for the phony stock certificates were actu¬ 
ally several top executives with the Erie Railroad itself. Gould was grateful. 
Gordon-Gordon then proposed that he and Gould join forces to buy up a 
controlling interest in Erie. Gould agreed. For a while the venture ap¬ 
peared to prosper. The two men were now good friends, and every time 
Gordon-Gordon came to Gould asking for money to buy more stock, 
Gould gave it to him. In 1873, however, Gordon-Gordon suddenly 
dumped all of his stock, making a fortune but drastically lowering the value 
of Gould’s own holdings. Then he disappeared from sight 

Upon investigation, Gould found out that Gordon-Gordon’s real name 
was John Crowningsfield, and that he was the bastard son of a merchant 
seaman and a London barmaid. There had been many clues before then 
that Gordon-Gordon was a con man, but his initial act of honesty and sup¬ 
port had so blinded Gould that it took the loss of millions for him to see 
through the scheme. 

A single act of honesty is often not enough. What is required is a repu¬ 
tation for honesty, built on a series of acts—but these can be quite inconse¬ 
quential. Once this reputation is established, as with first impressions, it is 
hard to shake. 

In ancient China, Duke Wu of Cheng decided it was time to take over 
the increasingly powerful kingdom of Hu. Telling no one of his plan, he 
married his daughter to Hu’s ruler. He then called a council and asked his 
ministers, “I am considering a militaty campaign. Which country should 
we invade?” As he had expected, one of his ministers replied, tt Hu should 
be invaded.” The duke seemed angry, and said, “Hu is a sister state now. 
Why do you suggest invading her?” He had the minister executed for his 
impolitic remark. The ruler of Hu heard about this, and considering other 
tokens of Wu’s honesty and the marriage with his daughter, he took no pre¬ 
cautions to defend himself from Cheng. A few weeks later, Cheng forces 
swept through Hu and took the country, never to relinquish it. 

Honesty is one of the best ways to disarm the wary, but it is not the 
only one. Any kind of noble, apparently selfless act will serve. Perhaps the 
best such act, though, is one of generosity. Few people can resist a gift, even 
from the most hardened enemy, which is why it is often the perfect way to 
disarm people. A gift brings out the child in us, instantly lowering our de¬ 
fenses. Although we often view other people’s actions in the most cynical 
light, we rarely see the Machiavellian element of a gift, which quite often 
hides ulterior motives. A gift is the perfect object in which to hide a decep¬ 
tive move. 

Over three thousand years ago the ancient Greeks traveled across the 
sea to recapture the beautiful Helen, stolen away from them by Paris, and 



to destroy Paris’s city, Troy. The siege lasted ten years, many heroes died, 
yet neither side had come close to victory. One day, the prophet Calchas 
assembled the Greeks. 

“Stop battering away at these walls!” he told them. “You must find 
some other way, some ruse. We cannot take 

Troy by force alone. We Image: The must find some cunning 

stratagem.” The cun- Trojan Hor se - ning Greek leader 

Odysseus then came up Your guile is with the idea of building 

a giant wooden horse, hidden inside hiding soldiers inside it, 

then offering it to the a magnificent Trojans as a gift. 

Neoptolemus, son of gift proves Achilles, was disgusted 

with this idea; it was irresistible to unmanly. Better for 

thousands to die on the your opponent. battlefield than to gain 

victory so deceitfully. The walls open. But the soldiers, faced 

with a choice between Once inside, another ten years of 

manliness, honor, and wreak havoc. death, on the one hand 

and a quick victory on the other, chose the 

horse, which was prompdy built The trick was successful and Troy fell. 
One gift did more for the Greek cause than ten years of fighting. 

Selective kindness should also be part of your arsenal of deception. For 
years the ancient Romans had besieged the city of the Faliscans, always un¬ 
successfully. One day, however, when the Roman general Camillus was 
encamped outside the city, he suddenly saw a man leading some children 
toward him. The man was a Faliscan teacher, and the children, it turned 
out, were the sons and daughters of the noblest and wealthiest citizens of 
the town. On the pretense of taking these children out for a walk, he had 
led them straight to the Romans, offering them as hostages in hopes of in¬ 
gratiating himself with Camillus, the city’s enemy. 

Camillus did not take the children hostage. He stripped the teacher, 
tied his hands behind his back, gave each child a rod, and let them whip 
him all the way back to the city. The gesture had an immediate effect on 
the Faliscans. Had Camillus used the children as hostages, some in the city 
would have voted to surrender. And even if the Faliscans had gone on 
fighting, their resistance would have been halfhearted. Camillus’s refusal to 
take advantage of the situation broke down the Faliscans’ resistance, and 
they surrendered. The general had calculated correctly. And in any case he 
had had nothing to lose: He knew that the hostage ploy would not have 
ended the war, at least not right away. By turning the situation around, he 
earned his enemy’s trust and respect, disarming them. Selective kindness 
will often break down even the most stubborn foe: Aiming right for the 
heart, it corrodes the will to fight back. 

Remember: By playing on people’s emotions, calculated acts of kind¬ 
ness can turn a Capone into a gullible child. As with any emotional ap¬ 
proach, the tactic must be practiced with caution: If people see through it, 
their disappointed feelings of gratitude and warmth will become the most 
violent hatred and distrust Unless you can make the gesture seem sincere 
and heartfelt, do not play with fire. 


LAW 12 


93 



Authority: When Duke Hsien 
of Chin was about to raid Yu, 
he presented to them a jade 
and a team of horses. When 
Earl Chih was about to raid 
Ch’ou-yu, he presented to 
them grand chariots. Hence 
the saying: “When you are 
about to take, you should 
give.” (Han-fei-tzu, Chinese 
philosopher, third century B.c.) 


REVERSAL 

When you have a history of deceit behind you, no amount of honesty, gen¬ 
erosity, or kindness will fool people. In fact it will only call attention to it¬ 
self. Once people have come to see you as deceitful, to act honest all of a 
sudden is simply suspicious. In these cases it is better to play the rogue. 

Count Lustig, pulling the biggest con of his career, was about to sell 
the Eiffel Tower to an unsuspecting industrialist who believed the govern¬ 
ment was auctioning it off for scrap metal. The industrialist was prepared 
to hand over a huge sum of money to Lustig, who had successfully imper¬ 
sonated a government official. At the last minute, however, the mark was 
suspicious. Something about Lustig bothered him. At the meeting in which 
he was to hand over the money, Lustig sensed his sudden distrust. 

Leaning over to the industrialist, Lustig explained, in a low whisper, 
how low his salary was, how difficult his finances were, on and on. After a 
few minutes of this, the industrialist realized that Lustig was asking for a 
bribe. For the first time he relaxed. Now he knew he could trust Lustig: 
Since all government officials were dishonest, Lustig had to be real. The 
man forked over the money. By acting dishonest, Lustig seemed the real 
McCoy. In this case selective honesty would have had the opposite effect 

As the French diplomat Talleyrand grew older, his reputation as a mas¬ 
ter liar and deceiver spread. At the Congress of Vienna (1814-1815), he 
would spin fabulous stories and make impossible remarks to people who 
knew he had to be lying. His dishonesty had no purpose except to cloak 
the moments when he really was deceiving them. One day, for example, 
among friends, Talleyrand said with apparent sincerity, “In business one 
ought to show one’s hand.” No one who heard him could believe their 
ears: A man who never once in his life had shown his cards was telling 
other people to show theirs. Tactics like this made it impossible to distin¬ 
guish Talleyrand’s real deceptions from his fake ones. By embracing his 
reputation for dishonesty, he preserved his ability to deceive. 

Nothing in the realm of power is set in stone. Overt deceptiveness will 
sometimes cover your tracks, even making you admired for the honesty of 
your dishonesty. 


94 LAW 12 



LAW 


13 

WHEN ASKING FOR HELP, 
APPEAL TO PEOPLE’S 
SELF-INTEREST, 
NEVER TO THEIR MERCY 
OR GRATITUDE 

JUDGMENT 

If you need to turn to an ally for help, do not bother to re¬ 
mind him. of your past assistance and good deeds. He 
will find a way to ignore you. Instead, uncover some¬ 
thing in your request, or in your alliance with him, that 
will benefit him , and emphasize it out of all proportion. 
He will respond enthusiastically when he sees something 
to be gained for himself 



I I IK PEASANT AM) 
TUI'. APl’IiK-TWI'.K 

A peasant had in his 
garden an apple-tree, 
which bore no fruit, but 
only served as a perch 
for the sparrows and 
grasshoppers. He 
resolved to cut it down, 
and, taking his ax in 
hand, made a bold 
stroke at its roots. The 
grasshoppers and spar¬ 
rows entreated him not 
to cut down the tree 
that sheltered them, but 
to spare it, and they 
would sing to him and 
lighten his labors. He 
paid no attention to 
their request, but gave 
the tree a second and a 
third blow with his ax. 
When he reached the 
hollow of the tree, he 
found a hive full of 
honey. Having tasted 
the honeycomb, he 
threw down his ax, and, 
looking on the tree as 
sacred, took great care 
of it. 

Self-interest alone 
moves some men. 

FABLES, 
Aesop, 
SIXTH CENTURY B.C. 


TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

In the early fourteenth century, a young man named Castruccio Castracani 
rose from the rank of common soldier to become lord of the great city of 
Lucca, Italy. One of the most powerful families in the city, the Poggios, 
had been instrumental in his climb (which succeeded through treachery 
and bloodshed), but after he came to power, they came to feel he had for¬ 
gotten them. His ambition outweighed any gratitude he felt. In 1325, while 
Castruccio was away fighting Lucca’s main rival, Florence, the Poggios 
conspired with other noble families in the city to rid themselves of this 
troublesome and ambitious prince. 

Mounting an insurrection, the plotters attacked and murdered the gov¬ 
ernor whom Castruccio had left behind to rule the city. Riots broke out, 
and the Castruccio supporters and the Poggio supporters were poised to do 
battle. At the height of the tension, however, Stefano di Poggio, the oldest 
member of the family, intervened, and made both sides lay down their 
arms. 

A peaceful man, Stefano had not taken part in the conspiracy. He had 
told his family it would end in a useless bloodbath. Now he insisted he 
should intercede on the family’s behalf and persuade Castruccio to listen to 
their complaints and satisfy their demands. Stefano was the oldest and wis¬ 
est member of the clan, and his family agreed to put their trust in his diplo¬ 
macy rather than in their weapons. 

When news of the rebellion reached Castruccio, he hurried back to 
Lucca. By the time he arrived, however, the fighting had ceased, through 
Stefano’s agency, and he was surprised by the city’s calm and peace. Ste¬ 
fano di Poggio had imagined that Castruccio would be grateful to him for 
his part in quelling the rebellion, so he paid the prince a visit. He explained 
how he had brought peace, then begged for Castruccio’s mercy. He said 
that the rebels in his family were young and impetuous, hungry for power 
yet inexperienced; he recalled his family’s past generosity to Castruccio. 
For all these reasons, he said, the great prince should pardon the Poggios 
and listen to their complaints. This, he said, was the only just thing to do, 
since the family had willingly laid down their arms and had always sup¬ 
ported him. 

Castruccio listened patiently. He seemed not the slightest bit angry or 
resentful. Instead, he told Stefano to rest assured that justice would prevail, 
and he asked him to bring his entire family to the palace to talk over their 
grievances and come to an agreement. As they took leave of one another, 
Castruccio said he thanked God for the chance he had been given to show 
his clemency and kindness. That evening the entire Poggio family came to 
the palace. Castruccio immediately had them imprisoned and a few days 
later all were executed, including Stefano. 

Interpretation 

Stefano di Poggio is the embodiment of all those who believe that the jus¬ 
tice and nobility of their cause will prevail. Certainly appeals to justice and 
gratitude have occasionally succeeded in the past, but more often than not 


96 


LAW 13 



they have had dire consequences, especially in dealings with the Castruc- 
cios of the world. Stefano knew' that the prince had risen to power through 
treachery and ruthlessness. This was a man, after ah, who had put a close 
and devoted friend to death. When Castruccio was told that it had been a 
terrible wrong to kill such an old friend, he replied that he had executed 
not an old friend but a new enemy. 

A man like Castruccio knows only force and self-interest. When the re¬ 
bellion began, to end it and place oneself at his mercy was the most dan¬ 
gerous possible move. Even once Stefano di Poggio had made that fatal 
mistake, however, he still had options: He could have offered money to 
Castruccio, could have made promises for the future, could have pointed 
out what the Poggios could still contribute to Castruccio’s power-—their in¬ 
fluence with the most influential families of Rome, for example, and the 
great marriage they could have brokered. 

Instead Stefano brought up the past, and debts that carried no obliga¬ 
tion. Not only is a man not obliged to be grateful, gratitude is often a terri¬ 
ble burden that he gladly discards. And in this case Castruccio rid himself 
of his obligations to the Poggios by eliminating the Poggios. 


Most men are so thor¬ 
oughly subjective that 
nothing really interests 
(hem but themselves. 
They always think of 
their own case as soon 
as ever any remark is 
made, and their whole 
attention is engrossed 
and absorbed by the 
merest chance refer¬ 
ence to anything which 
affects them personally, 
be it never so remote. 

Arthur 

Schopenhauer, 

1788-1860 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

In 433 B.C., just before the Peloponnesian War, the island of Corcyra (later 
called Corfu) and the Greek city-state of Corinth stood on the brink of con¬ 
flict. Both parties sent ambassadors to Athens to try to win over the Atheni¬ 
ans to their side. The stakes were high, since whoever had Athens on his 
side was sure to win. And whoever won the war would certainly give the 
defeated side no mercy. 

Corcyra spoke first. Its ambassador began by admitting that the island 
had never helped Athens before, and in fact had allied itself with Athens’s 
enemies. There were no ties of friendship or gratitude between Corcyra 
and Athens. Yes, the ambassador admitted, he had come to Athens now 
out of fear and concern for Corcyras safety. The only thing he could offer 
was an alliance of mutual interests. Corcyra had a navy only surpassed in 
size and strength by Athens’s own; an alliance between the two states 
would create a formidable force, one that could intimidate the rival state of 
Sparta. That, unfortunately, was all Corcyra had to offer. 

The representative from Corinth then gave a brilliant, passionate 
speech, in sharp contrast to the dry, colorless approach of the Corcyran. 
He talked of everything Corinth had done for Athens in the past. He asked 
how it would look to Athens’s other allies if the city put an agreement with 
a former enemy over one with a present friend, one that had served 
Athens’s interest loyally: Perhaps those allies would break their agreements 
with Athens if they saw that their loyalty was not valued. He referred to 
Hellenic law, and the need to repay Corinth for all its good deeds. He fi¬ 
nally went on to list the many services Corinth had performed for Athens, 
and the importance of showing gratitude to one’s friends. 

After the speech, the Athenians debated the issue in an assembly. On 


LAW 13 97 



the second round, they voted overwhelmingly to ally with Corcyra and 
drop Corinth. 

Interpretation 

History has remembered the Athenians nobly, but they were the preemi¬ 
nent realists of classical Greece. With them, all the rhetoric, all the emo¬ 
tional appeals in the world, could not match a good pragmatic argument, 
especially one that added to their power. 

What the Corinthian ambassador did not realize was that his refer¬ 
ences to Corinth’s past generosity' to Athens only irritated the Athenians, 
subdy asking them to feel guilty and putting them under obligation. The 
Athenians couldn’t care less about past favors and friendly feelings. At the 
same time, they knew that if their other allies thought them ungrateful for 
abandoning Corinth, these city-states would still be unlikely to break their 
ties to Athens, the preeminent power in Greece. Athens ruled its empire by 
force, and would simply compel any rebellious ally to return to the fold. 

When people choose between talk about the past and talk about the 
future, a pragmatic person will always opt for the future and forget the past. 
As the Corcyrans realized, it is always best to speak pragmatically to a 
pragmatic person. And in the end, most people are in fact pragmatic-—they 
will rarely act against their own self-interest. 

It has always been a rule that the weak should be subject to the strong; 
and besides, we consider that we are worthy of our power. Up till the 
present moment you, too, used to think that we were; hut now, after 
calculating your own interest, you are beginning to talk in terms of right 
and wrong. Considerations of this kind have never yet turned people aside 
from the opportunities of aggrandizement offered by s uperior strength . 

Athenian representative to Sparta, 
quoted in The Peloponnesian War, Thucydides, c. 465-.39? n.c. 


KEYS TO POWER 

In your quest for power, you will constantly find yourself in the position of 
asking for help from those more powerful than you. There is an art to ask¬ 
ing for help, an art that depends on your ability to understand the person 
you are dealing with, and to not confuse your needs with theirs. 

Most people never succeed at this, because they are completely 
trapped in their own wants and desires. They start from the assumption 
that the people they are appealing to have a selfless interest in helping 
them. They talk as if their needs mattered to these people—who probably 
couldn’t care less. Sometimes they refer to larger issues: a great cause, or 
grand emotions such as love and gratitude. They go for the big picture 
when simple, everyday realities would have much more appeal. What they 
do not realize is that even the most powerful person is locked inside needs 
of his own, and that if you make no appeal to his self-interest, he merely 
sees you as desperate or, at best, a waste of time. 



In the sixteenth century, Portuguese missionaries tried for years to con¬ 
vert the people of Japan to Catholicism, while at the same time Portugal 
had a monopoly on trade between japan and Europe. Although the mis¬ 
sionaries did have some success, they never got far among the ruling elite; 
by the beginning of the seventeenth century, in fact, their proselytizing had 
completely antagonized the Japanese emperor leyasu. When the Dutch 
began to arrive in Japan in great numbers, leyasu was much relieved. He 
needed Europeans for their know-how in guns and navigation, and here at 
last were Europeans who cared nothing for spreading religion—the Dutch 
wanted only to trade. leyasu swiftly moved to evict the Portuguese. From 
then on, he would only deal with the practical-minded Dutch. 

Japan and Holland were vastly different cultures, but each shared a 
timeless and universal concern: self-interest Every person you deal with is 
like another culture, an alien land with a past that has nothing to do with 
yours. Yet you can bypass the differences between you and him by appeal¬ 
ing to his self-interest. Do not be subtle: You have valuable knowledge to 
share, you will fill his coffers with gold, you will make him live longer and 
happier. This is a language that all of us speak and understand. 

A key step in the process is to understand the other person’s psychol¬ 
ogy. Is he vain? Is he concerned about his reputation or his social standing? 
Does he have enemies you could help him vanquish? Is he simply moti¬ 
vated by money and power? 

When the Mongols invaded China in the twelfth century, they threat¬ 
ened to obliterate a culture that had thrived for over two thousand years. 
Their leader, Genghis Khan, saw nothing in China but a country that 
lacked pasturing for his horses, and he decided to destroy the place, level¬ 
ing all its cities, for “it would be better to exterminate the Chinese and let 
the grass grow.” It was not a soldier, a general, or a king who saved the 
Chinese from devastation, but a man named Yelu Ch’u-Ts’ai. A foreigner 
himself, Ch’u-Ts’ai had come to appreciate the superiority of Chinese cul¬ 
ture. He managed to make himself a trusted adviser to Genghis Khan, and 
persuaded him that he would reap riches out of the place if, instead of de¬ 
stroying it, he simply taxed everyone who lived there. Khan saw the wis¬ 
dom in this and did as Ch’u-Ts’ai advised. 

When Khan took the city of Kaifeng, after a long siege, and decided to 
massacre its inhabitants (as he had in other cities that had resisted him), 
Ch’u-Ts’ai told him that the finest craftsmen and engineers in China had 
fled to Kaifeng, and it would be better to put them to use. Kaifeng was 
spared. Never before had Genghis Khan shown such mercy, but then it 
really wasn’t mercy that saved Kaifeng. Ch’u-Ts’ai knew Khan well. He was 
a barbaric peasant who cared nothing for culture, or indeed for anything 
other than warfar e and practical results. Ch’u-Ts’ai chose to appeal to the 
only emotion that would work on such a man: greed. 

Self-interest is the lever that will move people. Once you make them 
see how you can in some way meet their needs or advance their cause, 
their resistance to your requests for help will magically fall away. At each 
step on the way to acquiring power, you must train yourself to think your 



way inside the other person’s mind, to see their needs and interests, to get 
rid of the screen of your own feelings that obscure the truth. Master this art 
and there will be no limits to what you can accomplish. 


Image; A Cord that 
Binds. The cord of 
mercy and grati¬ 
tude is threadbare, 
and will break at 
the first shock. 
Do not throw 
such a lifeline. 
The cord of 
mutual self-inter¬ 
est is woven of 
many fibers and 
cannot easily be 
severed. It will serve 
you well for years. 


Authority: The shortest and best way to make your for¬ 
tune is to let people see dearly that it is in their interests 
to promote yours. (Jean de La Bravere, 1645-1696) 


REVERSAL 

Some people will see an appeal to their self-interest as ugly and ignoble. 
They actually prefer to be able to exercise charity, mercy, and justice, 
which are their ways of feeling superior to you: When you beg them for 
help, you emphasize their power and position. They are strong enough to 
need nothing from you except the chance to feel superior. This is the wine 
that intoxicates them. They are dying to fund your project, to introduce 
you to powerful people—provided, of course, that all this is done in public, 
and for a good cause (usually the more public, the better). Not everyone, 
then, can be approached through cynical self-interest. Some people will be 
put off by it, because they don’t want to seem to be motivated by such 
things. They need opportunities to display their good heart 

Do not be shy. Give them that opportunity. It’s not as if you are con¬ 
ning them by asking for help—it is really their pleasure to give, and to be 
seen giving. You must distinguish the differences among powerful people 
and figure out what makes them tick. When they ooze greed, do not appeal 
to their charity. When they want to look charitable and noble, do not ap¬ 
peal to their greed. 



LAW 


14 

POSE AS A FRIEND, 
WORK AS A SPY 

JUDGMENT 

Knotting about your rival is critical Use spies to gather 
valuable information that will keep you a step ahead. 
Better still: Play the spy yourself In polite social encoun¬ 
ters, team to probe. Ask indirect questions to get people to 
reveal their weaknesses and intentions . There is no occa¬ 
sion that is not an opportunity for artful spying. 



OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

Joseph Duveen was undoubtedly the greatest art dealer of his time—from 
1904 to 1940 he almost single-handedly monopolized America’s million¬ 
aire art-collecting market. But one prize plum eluded him: die industrialist 
Andrew Mellon. Before he died, Duveen was determined to make Mellon 
a client 

Duveen’s friends said this was an impossible dream. Mellon was a stiff, 
taciturn man. The stories he had heard about the congenial, talkative Du¬ 
veen rubbed him the wrong way—he had made it clear he had no desire to 
meet the man. Yet Duveen told his doubting friends, ‘‘Not only will Mellon 
buy from me but he will buy only from me.” For several years he tracked 
his prey, learning the man’s habits, tastes, phobias. To do this, he secretly 
put several of Mellon’s staff on his own payroll, worming valuable informa¬ 
tion out of them. By the time he moved into action, he knew Mellon about 
as well as Mellon’s wife did. 

In 1921 Mellon was visiting London, and staying in a palatial suite on 
the third floor of Claridge’s Hotel. Duveen booked himself into the suite 
just below Mellon’s, on the second floor. He had arranged for his valet to 
befriend Mellon’s valet, and on the fateful day he had chosen to make his 
move, Mellon’s valet told Duveen’s valet, who told Duveen, that he had 
just helped Mellon on with his overcoat, and that the industrialist was mak¬ 
ing his way down the corridor to ring for the lift. 

Duveen’s valet hurriedly helped Duveen with his own overcoat. Sec¬ 
onds later, Duveen entered the lift, and lo and behold, there was Mellon. 
“How do you do, Mr. Mellon?” said Duveen, introducing himself. “I am on 
my way to the National Gallery to look at some pictures.” How uncanny— 
that was precisely where Mellon was headed. And so Duveen was able to 
accompany his prey to the one location that would ensure his success. He 
knew Mellon’s taste inside and out, and while the two men wandered 
through the museum, he dazzled the magnate with his knowledge. Once 
again quite uncannily, they seemed to have remarkably similar tastes. 

Mellon was pleasantly surprised: This was not the Duveen he had ex¬ 
pected. The man was charming and agreeable, and clearly had exquisite 
taste. When they returned to New York, Mellon visited Duveen’s exclusive 
gallery and fell in love with the collection. Everything, surprisingly enough, 
seemed to be precisely the kind of work he wanted to collect. For the rest 
of his life he was Duveen’s best and most generous client. 

Interpretation 

A man as ambitious and competitive as Joseph Duveen left nothing to 
chance. What’s the point of winging it, of just hoping you may be able to 
charm this or that client? It’s like shooting ducks blindfolded. Arm yourself 
with a little knowledge and your aim improves. 

Mellon was the most spectacular of Duveen’s catches, but he spied on 
many a millionaire. By secretly putting members of his clients’ household 
staffs on his own payroll, he would gain constant access to valuable infor- 




mation about their masters’ comings and goings, changes in taste, and 
other such tidbits of information that would put him a step ahead. A rival 
of Duveen’s who wanted to make Henry Frick a client noticed that when¬ 
ever he visited this wealthy New Yorker, Duveen was there before him, as 
if he had a sixth sense. To other dealers Duveen seemed to be everywhere, 
and to know everything before they did. His powers discouraged and dis¬ 
heartened them, until many simply gave up going after the wealthy clients 
who could make a dealer rich. 

Such is the power of artful spying: It makes you seem all-powerful, 
clairvoyant. Your knowledge of your mark can also make you seem charm¬ 
ing, so well can you anticipate his desires. No one sees the source of your 
power, and what they cannot see they cannot fight. 


Rulers see through spies, as cows through smell. Brahmins through 
scriptures and the rest of the people through their normal eyes. 

Kautiha, Indian philosopher, third century a.c. 


KEYS TO POWER 

In the realm of power, your goal is a degree of control over future events. 
Part of the problem you face, then, is that people won’t tell you all their 
thoughts, emotions, and plans. Controlling what they say, they often keep 
the most critical parts of their character hidden—their weaknesses, ulterior 
motives, obsessions. The result is that you cannot predict their moves, and 
are constantly in the dark. The trick is to find a way to probe them, to find 
out their secrets and hidden intentions, without letting them know what 
you are up to. 

This is not as difficult as you might think. A friendly front will let you 
secretly gather information on friends and enemies alike. Let others con¬ 
sult the horoscope, or read tarot cards: Y>u have more concrete means of 
seeing into the future. 

The most common way of spying is to use other people, as Duveen 
did. The method is simple, powerful, but risky: You will certainly gather in¬ 
formation, but you have little control over the people who are doing the 
work. Perhaps they will ineptly reveal your spying, or even secretly turn 
against you. It is far better to be the spy yourself, to pose as a friend while 
secretly gathering information. 

The French politician Talleyrand was one of the greatest practitioners 
of this art. He had an uncanny ability to worm secrets out of people in po¬ 
lite conversation. A contemporary of his, Baron de Vitrolles, wrote, “Wit 
and grace marked his conversation. He possessed the art of concealing his 
thoughts or his malice beneath a transparent veil of insinuations, words 
that imply something more than they express. Only when necessary did he 
inject his own personality.” The key here is Talleyrand’s ability to suppress 
himself in the conversation, to make others talk endlessly about themselves 
and inadvertently reveal their intentions and plans. 


law u 


103 



If you have reason to 
suspect that a person is 
telling you a lie., look as 
though you believed 
every word he said. 

This will give him 
courage to go on; he 
will become more 
vehement in his 
assertions, and in the 
end betray himself. 
Again, if you perceive 
that a person is trying 
to conceal something 
from you, but with only 
partial success, look as 
though you did not 
believe him. The oppo¬ 
sition on your part will 
provoke him into lead¬ 
ing out his reserve of 
(ruth and bringing the 
whole force of it to 
bear upon your 
incredulity. 

Arthur 

Schopenhauer, 

1788-1860 


Throughout Talleyrand’s life, people said he was a superb conversa¬ 
tionalist—yet he actually said very little. He never talked about his own 
ideas; he got others to reveal theirs. He would organize friendly games of 
charades for foreign diplomats, social gatherings where, however, he 
would carefully weigh their words, cajole confidences out of them, and 
gather information invaluable to his work as France’s foreign minister. At 
the Congress of Vienna (1814-1815) he did his spying in other ways: He 
would blurt out what seemed to be a secret (actually something he had 
made up), then watch his listeners’ reactions. He might tell a gathering of 
diplomats, for instance, that a reliable source had revealed to him that the 
czar of Russia was planning to arrest his top general for treason. By watch¬ 
ing the diplomats’ reactions to this made-up story, he would know which 
ones were most excited by the weakening of the Russian army—perhaps 
their goverments had designs on Russia? As Baron von Stetten said, 
“Monsieur Talleyrand fires a pistol into the air to see who will jump out the 
window.” 

During social gatherings and innocuous encounters, pay attention. 
This is when people’s guards are down. By suppressing your own personal¬ 
ity, you can make them reveal things. The brilliance of the maneuver is 
that they will mistake your interest in them for friendship, so that you not 
only learn, you make allies. 

Nevertheless, you should practice this tactic with caution and care. If 
people begin to suspect you are worming secrets out of them under the 
cover of conversation, they will strictly avoid you. Emphasize friendly 
chatter, not valuable information. Your search for gems of information can¬ 
not be too obvious, or your probing questions will reveal more about your¬ 
self and your intentions than about the information you hope to find. 

A trick to try in spying comes from La Rochefoucauld, who wrote, 
“Sincerity is found in very few men, and is often the cleverest of ruses— 
one is sincere in order to draw out the confidence and secrets of the other.” 
By pretending to bare your heart to another person, in other words, you 
make them more likely to reveal their own secrets. Give them a false con¬ 
fession and they will give you a real one. Another trick was identified by 
the philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer, who suggested vehemently contra¬ 
dicting people you’re in conversation with as a way of irritating them, stir¬ 
ring them up so that they lose some of the control over their words. In their 
emotional reaction they will reveal all kinds of truths about themselves, 
truths you can later use against them. 

Another method of indirect spying is to test people, to lay little traps 
that make them reveal things about themselves. Chosroes II, a notoriously 
clever seventh-century king of the Persians, had many ways of seeing 
through his subjects without raising suspicion. If he noticed, for instance, 
that two of his courtiers had become particularly friendly, he would call 
one of them aside and say he had information that the other was a traitor, 
and would soon be killed. The king would tell the courtier he trusted him 
more than anyone, and that he must keep this information secret. Then he 


104 : LAW 14 



would watch the two men carefully. If he saw that the second courtier had 
not changed in his behavior toward the king, he would conclude that the 
first courtier had kept the secret, and he would quickly promote the man, 
later taking him aside to confess, “I meant to kill your friend because of 
certain information that had reached me, but, when I investigated the mat¬ 
ter, I found it was untrue.” If, on the other hand, the second courtier started 
to avoid the king, acting aloof and tense, Chosroes would know that the se¬ 
cret had been revealed. He would ban the second courtier from his court, 
letting him know that the whole business had only been a test, but that 
even though the man had done nothing wrong, he could no longer trust 
him. The first courtier, however, had revealed a secret, and him Chosroes 
would ban from his entire kingdom. 

It may seem an odd form of spying that reveals not empirical informa¬ 
tion but a person’s character. Often, however, it is the best way of solving 
problems before they arise. 

By tempting people into certain acts, you learn about their loyalty, 
their honesty, and so on. And this kind of knowledge is often the most 
valuable of all; Armed with it, you can predict their actions in the future. 


Image: 

The Third Eye of 
the Spy. In the land of 
the two-eyed, the third eye 
gives you the omniscience 
of a god. You see further than 
others, and you see deeper 
into them. Nobody is 
safe from the eye 
but you. 


Authority: Now, the reason a brilliant sovereign and a wise general 
conquer the enemy whenever they move, and their achievements 
surpass those of ordinary men, is their foreknowledge of the enemy 
situation. This “foreknowledge” cannot be elicited from spirits, nor 
from gods, nor by analogy with past events, nor by astrologic calcu¬ 
lations. It must be obtained from men who know the enemy sit¬ 
uation—from spies. (Sun-tzu, The Art of War, fourth century B.C.) 



REVERSAL 

Information is critical to power, but just as you spy on other people, you 
must be prepared for them to spy on you. One of the most potent weapons 
in the battle for information, then, is giving out false information. As Win¬ 
ston Churchill said, “Truth is so precious that she should always be at¬ 
tended by a bodyguard of lies,” You must surround yourself with such a 
bodyguard, so that your truth cannot be penetrated. By planting the infor¬ 
mation of your choice, you control the game. 

In 1944 the Nazis’ rocket-bomb attacks on London suddenly escalated. 
Over two thousand V-l flying bombs fell on the city, killing more than five 
thousand people and wounding many more. Somehow, however, the Ger¬ 
mans consistently missed their targets. Bombs that were intended for 
Tower Bridge, or Piccadilly, would fall well short of the city, landing in the 
less populated suburbs. This was because, in fixing their targets, the Ger¬ 
mans relied on secret agents they had planted in England. They did not 
know that these agents had been discovered, and that in their place, 
English-controlled agents were feeding them subtly deceptive information. 

The bombs would hit farther and farther from their targets every time 
they fell. By the end of the campaign they were landing on cows in the 
country. By feeding people wrong information, then, you gain a potent ad¬ 
vantage. While spying gives you a third eye, disinformation puts out one of 
your enemy’s eyes. A cyclops, he always misses his target. 



LAW 


15 

CRUSH YOUR 
ENEMY TOTALLY 

JUDGMENT 

All great leaders since Moses have known that a feared 
enemy must be crushed completely . (Sometimes they have 
learned this the hard way.) If one ember is left alight , no 
matter how dimly it smolders , afire will eventually break 
out. More is lost through stopping halfway than through 
total annihilation: The enemy will recover, and will seek 
revenge « Crush him » not only in body but in spirit > 



The remnants of an 
enemy can became 
active tike those of a 
disease or fire. Hence, 
these should be exter¬ 
minated completely .,.. 
One should never 
ignore an enemy, 
knowing him to be 
weak. He becomes 
dangerous in due 
course, like the spark 
of fire in a haystack. 

Kautilya, 
Indian philosofhpr, 

I1I1RU CKNTURY H.C. 


•mi*: i'hap at 

'NIMCACI.IA 

On the day Ramiro 
was executed, Cesare 
i Borgia f quit Cesena, 
leaving the mutilated 
body on the town 
square, and marched 
south. Three days later 
he arrived at fa no, 
where he received the 
envoys of the city of 
Ancona, who assured 
him of their loyalty. 
A messenger from 
Vitellozzo Vitalii 
announced that the 
iiltie Adriatic port of 
Sinigaglia had surren¬ 
dered to the condottieri 
/mercenary soldiers]. 

Only the citadel, in 
charge of the Genoese 
Andrea Daria, still 
held out, and Dona 
refused to hand it over 
to anyone except 
Cesare himself 
I Borgia] sent word 
that he would arrive 
the next day. which 
was just what the 


TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

No rivalry between leaders is more celebrated in Chinese history than the 
struggle between Hsiang Yu and Liu Pang. These two generals began their 
careers as friends, fighting on the same side. Hsiang Yu came from the no¬ 
bility; large and powerful, given to bouts of violence and temper, a bit dull- 
witted, he was yet a mighty warrior who always fought at the head of his 
troops. Liu Pang came from peasant stock. He had never been much of a 
soldier, and preferred women and wine to fighting; in fact, he was some¬ 
thing of a scoundrel. But he was wily, and he had the ability to recognize 
the best strategists, keep them as his advisers, and listen to their advice. He 
had risen in the army through these strengths. 

In 208 B.C., the king of Ch’u sent two massive armies to conquer the 
powerful kingdom of Ch’in- One army went north, under the generalship 
of Sung Yi, with Hsiang Yu second in command; the other, led by Liu 
Pang, headed straight toward Ch’in. The target was the kingdom’s splendid 
capital, Hsien-yang. And Hsiang Yu, ever violent and impatient, could not 
stand the idea that Liu Pang would get to Hsien-yang first, and perhaps 
would assume command of the entire army. 

At one point on the northern front, Hsiang’s commander, Sung Yi, 
hesitated in sending his troops into battle. Furious, Hsiang entered Sung 
Yi’s tent, proclaimed him a traitor, cut off his h ead, and assumed sole com¬ 
mand of the army. Without waiting for orders, he left the northern front 
and marched directly on Hsien-yang. He felt certain he was the better sol¬ 
dier and general than Liu, but, to his utter astonishment, his rival, leading a 
smaller, swifter army, managed to reach Hsien-yang first. Hsiang had an 
adviser, Fan Tseng, who warned him, “This village headman [Liu Pang] 
used to be greedy only for riches and women, but since entering the capital 
he has not been led astray by wealth, wine, or sex. That shows he is aiming 
high.” 

Fan Tseng urged Hsiang to kill his rival before it was too late. He told 
the general to invite die wily peasant to a banquet at their camp outside 
Hsien-yang, and, in the midst of a celebratory sword dance, to have his 
head cut off. The invitation was sent; Liu fell for the trap, and came to the 
banquet. But Hsiang hesitated in ordering the sword dance, and by the 
time he gave the signal, Liu had sensed a trap, and managed to escape. 
“Bah!” cried Fan Tseng in disgust, seeing that Hsiang had botched the plot. 
“One cannot plan with a simpleton. Liu Pang will steal your empire yet 
and make us all his prisoners.” 

Realizing his mistake, Hsiang hurriedly marched on Hsien-yang, this 
time determined to hack off his rival’s head. Liu was never one to fight 
when the odds were against him, and he abandoned the city. Hsiang cap¬ 
tured Hsien-yang, murdered the young prince of Ch’in, and burned the 
city’ to the ground. Liu was now Hsiang’s bitter enemy, and he pursued 
him for many months, finally cornering him in a walled city. Lacking food, 
his army in disarray, Liu sued for peace. 

Again Fan Tseng warned Hsiang, “Crush him now! If you let him go 


10 $ LAW is 



again, you will be sorry- later.” But Hsiang decided to be merciful He 
wanted to bring Liu back to Ch’u alive, and to force his former friend to ac¬ 
knowledge him as master. But Fan proved right: Liu managed to use the 
negotiations for his surrender as a distraction, and he escaped with a small 
army. Hsiang, amazed that he had yet again let his rival slip away, once 
more set out after Liu, this time with such ferocity that he seemed to have 
lost his mind. At one point, having captured Liu’s father in battle, Hsiang 
stood the old man up during the fighting and yelled to Liu across the line of 
troops, “Surrender now, or I shall boil your father alive!” Liu calmly an¬ 
swered, “But we are sworn brothers. So my father is your father also. If you 
insist on boiling your own father, send me a bowl of the soup!” Hsiang 
backed down, and the struggle continued. 

A few weeks later, in the thick of the hunt, Hsiang scattered his forces 
unwisely, and in a surprise attack Liu was able to surround his main garri¬ 
son. For the first time the tables were turned. Now it was Hsiang who sued 
for peace. Liu’s top adviser urged him to destroy Hsiang, crush his army, 
show no mercy. “To let him go would be like rearing a tiger—it will devour 
you later,” the adviser said. Liu agreed. 

Making a false treaty, he lured Hsiang into relaxing his defense, then 
slaughtered almost all of his army. Hsiang managed to escape. Alone and 
on foot, knowing that Liu had put a bounty on his head, he came upon a 
small group of his own retreating soldiers, and cried out, “I hear Liu Pang 
has offered one thousand pieces of gold and a fief of ten thousand families 
for my head. Let me do you a favor.” Then he slit his own throat and died. 

Interpretation 

Hsiang Yu had proven his ruthlessness on many an occasion. He rarely 
hesitated in doing away with a rival if it served his purposes. But with Liu 
Pang he acted differently. He respected his rival, and did not want to defeat 
him through deception; he wanted to prove his superiority on the battle¬ 
field, even to force the clever Liu to surrender and to serve him. Every time 
he had his rival in his hands, something made him hesitate—a fatal sympa¬ 
thy with or respect for the man who, after all, had once been a friend and 
comrade in arms. But the moment Hsiang made it clear that he intended to 
do away with Liu, yet failed to accomplish it, he sealed his own doom. Liu 
would not suffer the same hesitation once the tables were turned. 

This is the fate that faces all of us when we sympathize with our ene¬ 
mies, when pity, or the hope of reconciliation, makes us pull back from 
doing away with them. We only strengthen their fear and hatred of us. We 
have beaten them, and they are humiliated; yet we nurture these resentful 
vipers who will one day kill us. Power cannot be dealt with this way. It 
must be exterminated, crushed, and denied the chance to return to haunt 
us. This is all the truer with a former friend who has become an enemy. 
The law governing fatal antagonisms reads: Reconciliation is out of the 
question. Only one side can win, and it must win totally. 

Liu Pang learned this lesson well. After defeating Hsiang Yu, this son 


condottieri wanted to 
hear. Once he reached 
Sinigagliu. Cesare 
would he an easy prey, 
caught between the 
citadel and their forces 
ringing the town.... 

The condottieri were 
sure they had military 
superiority, believing 
that the departure of 
the French troops had 
left Cesare with only 
a small force. 

In fact . according to 
Machiavelli, [ Borgiaf 
had left C-esena with 
ten thousand infantry¬ 
men and three thou¬ 
sand horse, taking 
pains to split up his 
men so that they would 
march along parallel 
routes before converg¬ 
ing on Sinigagliu. The 
reason for such a large 
force was that he knew, 
from a confession 
extracted from Ramiro 
de Lorca, what the 
condottieri had up 
their sleeve. He there¬ 
fore decided to turn 
their own trap against 
them. This was the 
masterpiece of trickery 
that the historian Paolo 
Clio vio later called “the 
magnificent deceit." 

At dawn on December 
31 [1502}, Cesare 
reached the outskirts of 
Sinigaglia.... Led by 
Michel otto Corel la, 
Cesare s advance guard 
of two hundred lances 
took up its position on 
the canal bridge.... 
This control of the 
bridge effectively 
prevented the conspira¬ 
tors' troops from with¬ 
drawing. . . . 

Cesare greeted the 
condottieri effusively 
and invited them to 
join him. ■ . Michelotto 


LAW 15 ! 109 



had prepared the 
Palazzo Bernardino 
for Cesare V use, and 
the dtike invited the 
eon dottier i inside .... 
Once indoors the men 
were quietly arrested 
by guards who crept up 
from the rear .... 
I Cesaref gave orders 
for an attack on 
Viiellt's and Orsini s 
soldiers in the outlying 
areas .».. That night, 
white their troops were 
being crushed, Miche- 
lotto throttled Olive¬ 
rs to and Vi tel li in the 
Bernardino palace ..,. 

At one fell swoop, 
fBorgia / had got rid of 
his former generals and 
worst enemies, 

TUI-' BOROIAS, 

Ivan 0t.oin.A5. 

1989 


To have ultimate 
victory, you must he 
ruthless. 

Na folk on Bonaparte, 
1769-L821 


of a farmer went on to become supreme commander of the armies of Ch’u. 
Crushing his next rival—the king of Ch’u, his own former leader—he 
crowned himself emperor, defeated everyone in his path, and went down 
in history as one of the greatest rulers of China, the immortal Han Kao-tsu, 
founder of the Han Dynasty. 

Those who seek to achieve things should show no mercy. 

Kautilya, Indian philosopher, third century H.C. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

Wu Chao, bom in A,D. 625, was the daughter of a duke, and as a beautiful 
young woman of many charms, she was accordingly attached to the harem 
of Emperor T’ai Tsung. 

The imperial harem was a dangerous place, full of young concubines 
vying to become the emperor’s favorite. Wu’s beauty and forceful charac¬ 
ter quickly won her this battle, but, knowing that an emperor, like other 
powerful men, is a creature of whim, and that she could easily be replaced, 
she kept her eye on the future. 

Wu managed to seduce the emperor’s dissolute son, Kao Tsung, on the 
only possible occasion when she could find him alone: while he was reliev¬ 
ing himself at the royal urinal. Even so, when the emperor died and Kao 
Tsung took over the throne, she still suffered the fate to which all wives and 
concubines of a deceased emperor were bound by tradition and law: Her 
head shaven, she entered a convent, for what was supposed to be die rest 
of her life. For seven years Wu schemed to escape. By communicating in 
secret with the new emperor, and by befriending his wife, the empress, she 
managed to get a highly unusual royal edict allowing her to return to the 
palace and to the royal harem. Once there, she fawned on the empress, 
while still sleeping with the emperor. The empress did not discourage 
this—she had yet to provide the emperor with an heir, her position was 
vulnerable, and Wu was a valuable ally. 

In 654 Wu Chao gave birth to a child. One day the empress came to 
visit, and as soon as she had left, Wu smothered the newborn—her own 
baby. When the murder was discovered, suspicion immediately fell on the 
empress, who had been on the scene moments earlier, and whose jealous 
nature was known by all. This was precisely Wu’s plan. Shortly thereafter, 
the empress was charged with murder and executed. Wu Chao was 
crowned empress in her place. Her new husband, addicted to his life of 
pleasure, gladly gave up the reins of government to Wu Chao, who was 
from then on known as Empress Wu. 

Although now in a position of great power, Wu hardly felt secure. 
There were enemies everywhere; she could not let down her guard for one 
moment. Indeed, when she was forty-one, she began to fear that her beau 
tiful young niece was becoming the emperor’s favorite. She poisoned the 
woman with a clay mixed into her food. In 675 her own son, touted as the 


no 


LAW 15 




heir apparent, was poisoned as well The next-eldest son—illegitimate, but 
now the crown prince—was exiled a little later on trumped-up charges. 
And when the emperor died, in 683, Wu managed to have the son after 
that, declared unfit for the throne. All this meant that it was her youngest, 
most ineffectual son who finally became emperor. In this way she contin¬ 
ued to rule. 

Over the next five years there were innumerable palace coups. All of 
them failed, and all of the conspirators were executed. By 688 there was no 
one left to challenge Wu. She proclaimed herself a divine descendant of 
Buddha, and in 690 her wishes were finally granted: She was named Holy 
and Divine “Emperor” of China. 

Wu became emperor because there was literally nobody left from the 
previous "Tang dynasty. And so she ruled unchallenged, for over a decade 
of relative peace. In 705, at the age of eighty, she was forced to abdicate. 

Interpretation 

All who knew Empress Wu remarked on her energy and intelligence. At 
the time, there was no glory available for an ambitious woman beyond a 
few years in the imperial harem, then a lifetime walled up in a convent In 
Wu’s gradual but remarkable rise to the top, she was never naive. She 
knew that any hesitation, any momentary weakness, would spell her end. 
If, every time she got rid of a rival a new one appeared, the solution was 
simple: She had to crush them all or be killed herself. Other emperors be¬ 
fore her had followed the same path to the top, but Wu—who, as a woman, 
had next to no chance to gain power—had to be more ruthless still. 

Empress Wu’s forty-year reign was one of the longest in Chinese his¬ 
tory. Although the story of her bloody rise to power is well known, in 
China she is considered one of the period’s most able and effective rulers. 

A priest asked the dying Spanish statesman and general Raman Maria Narvaez 

(1800-1868), “Does your Excellency forgive all your enemies V “f do not 
have to forgive my enemies, ” answered Narvaez , “I have had them all shot. ” 


KEYS TO POWER 

It is no accident that the two stories illustrating this law come from China: 
Chinese history abounds with examples of enemies who were left alive and 
returned to haunt the lenient. “Crush the enemy” is a key strategic tenet of 
Sun-tzu, the fourth-century-B.C. author of The Art of War. The idea is simple: 
Your enemies wish you ill. There is nothing they want more than to elimi¬ 
nate you. If, in your struggles with them, you stop halfway or even three 
quarters of the way, out of mercy or hope of reconciliation, you only make 
them more determined, more embittered, and they will someday take re¬ 
venge. They may act friendly for the time being, but this is only because 
you have defeated them. They have no choice but to bide their time. 

The solution: Have no mercy. Crush your enemies as totally as they 



would crush you. Ultimately the only peace and security you can hope for 
from your enemies is their disappearance. 

Mao Tse-tung, a devoted reader of Sun-fczu and of Chinese history gen¬ 
erally, knew the importance of this law. In 1934 the Communist leader and 
some 75,000 poorly equipped soldiers fled into the desolate mountains of 
western China to escape Chiang Kai-shek’s much larger army, in what has 
since been called the Long March. 

Chiang was determined to eliminate every last Communist, and by a 
few years later Mao had less than 10,000 soldiers left. By 1937, in fact, 
when China was invaded by Japan, Chiang calculated that the Commu¬ 
nists were no longer a threat He chose to give up the chase and concen¬ 
trate on the Japanese. Ten years later the Communists had recovered 
enough to rout Chiang’s army. Chiang had forgotten the ancient wisdom of 
crushing the enemy; Mao had not. Chiang was pursued until he and his en¬ 
tire army fled to the island of Taiwan. Nothing remains of his regime in 
mainland China to this day. 

The wisdom behind “crushing the enemy” is as ancient as the Bible: 
Its first practitioner may have been Moses, who learned it from God Him¬ 
self, when He parted the Red Sea for the Jews, then let the water flow back 
over the pursuing Egyptians so that “not so much as one of them re¬ 
mained.” When Moses returned from Mount Sinai with the Ten Com¬ 
mandments and found his people worshipping the Golden Calf, he had 
every last offender slaughtered. And just before he died, he told his follow¬ 
ers, finally about to enter the Promised Land, that when they had defeated 
the tribes of Canaan they should “utterly destroy them . . . make no 
covenant with them, and show no mercy to them.” 

The goal of total victory is an axiom of modern warfare, and was codi¬ 
fied as such by Carl von Clausewitz, the premier philosopher of war. Ana¬ 
lyzing the campaigns of Napoleon, von Clausewitz wrote, “We do claim 
that direct annihilation of the enemy’s forces must always be the dominant 
consideration. ... Once a major victory is achieved there must be no talk of 
rest, of breathing space . . . but only of the pursuit, going for the enemy 
again, seizing his capital, attacking his reserves and anything else that 
might give his country aid and comfort” The reason for this is that after 
war come negotiation and the division of territory. If you have only won a 
partial victory, you will inevitably lose in negotiation what you have 
gained by war. 

The solution is simple: Allow your enemies no options. Annihilate 
them and their territory is yours to carve. The goal of power is to control 
your enemies completely, to make them obey your will. You cannot afford 
to go halfway If they have no options, they will be forced to do your bid¬ 
ding. This law has applications far beyond the battlefield. Negotiation is the 
insidious viper that will eat away at your victory, so give your enemies 
nothing to negotiate, no hope, no room to maneuver. They are crushed 
and that is that. 

Realize this: In your struggle for power you will stir up rivalries and 


112 LAW 15 



create enemies. There will be people yon cannot win over, who will re¬ 
main your enemies no matter what. But whatever wound you inflicted on 
them, deliberately or not, do not take their hatred personally. Just recog¬ 
nize that there is no possibility of peace between you, especially as long as 
you stay in power. If you let them stick around, they will seek revenge, as 
certainly as night follows day. To wait for them to show their cards is just 
silly; as Empress Wu understood, by then it will be too late. 

Be realistic: With an enemy like this around, you will never be secure. 
Remember the lessons of history, and the wisdom of Moses and Mao: 
Never go halfway. 

It is not, of course, a question of murder, it is a question of banishment. 
Sufficiently weakened and then exiled from your court forever, your ene¬ 
mies are rendered harmless. They have no hope of recovering, insinuating 
themselves and hurting you. And if they cannot be banished, at least un¬ 
derstand that they are plotting against you, and pay no heed to whatever 
friendliness they feign. Your only weapon in such a situation is your own 
wariness. If you cannot banish them immediately, then plot for the best 
time to act. 


Image: A Viper crushed 
beneath your foot but left 
alive, will rear up and bite 
you with a double dose of 
venom. An enemy that is 
left around is like a half- 
dead viper that you nurse 
back to health. Time makes 
the venom grow stronger. 


Authority: For it must be 
noted, that men must either be 
caressed or else annihilated; 
they will revenge themselves 
for small injuries, but cannot 
do so for great ones; the injuiy 
therefore that we do to a man 
must be such that we need not 
fear his vengeance. (Niccold 
Machiavelli, 1469-1527) 




REVERSAL 

This law should very rarely be ignored, but it does sometimes happen that 
it is better to let your enemies destroy themselves, if such a thing is possi¬ 
ble, than to make them suffer by your hand. In warfare, for example, a 
good general knows that if he attacks an army when it is cornered, its sol¬ 
diers will fight much more fiercely. It is sometimes better, then, to leave 
them an escape route, a way out As they retreat, they wear themselves out, 
and are ultimately more demoralized by the retreat than by any defeat he 
might inflict on the battlefield. When you have someone on the ropes, 
then—but only when you are sure they have no chance of recovery—you 
might let them hang themselves. Let them be the agents of their own de¬ 
struction. The result will be the same, and you won’t feel half as bad. 

Finally, sometimes by crushing an enemy, you embitter them so much 
that they spend years and years plotting revenge. The Treaty of Versailles 
had such an effect on the Germans. Some would argue that in the long run 
it would be better to show some leniency. The problem is, your leniency 
involves another risk—it may embolden the enemy, which still harbors a 
grudge, but now has some room to operate. It is almost always wiser to 
crush your enemy. If they plot revenge years later, do not let your guard 
down, but simply crush them again. 



LAW 



USE ABSENCE TO 
INCREASE RESPECT 
AND HONOR 


JUDGMENT 

Too much circulation makes the price go down: The more 
you are seen and heard from, the more common you ap¬ 
pear. If you are already established in a group, temporary 
withdrawal from it will make you more talked about, 
even more admired. You must learn when to leave. Cre¬ 
ate value through scarcity. 



Tllh CAMEL AMJTHK 
nj)ATI\<: STICKS 

The first man who saw 
a camel fled; 
The second ventured 
within distance; 
The third dared slip a 
halter round its head. 
Familiarity in this 
existence 
Makes all things tame, 
for what may seem 
Terrible or bizarre, 
when once our eyes 
Have had time to 
acclimatize. 
Becomes quite 
co mmonp lace. Since 
I 'm on this theme, 
I've heard of sentinels 
posted by the shore 
Who, spotting some¬ 
thing far-away afloat, 
Couldn't resist 
the shout: 
"A sail! A sail! 
.4 mighty man-of-war 7" 
Five minutes later it’s 
a packet boat , 
And then a skiff and 
then a hale. 
And finally some sticks 
bobbing about. 
/ know of plenty such 
To whom this story 
applies — 
People whom distance 
magnifies. 
Who, dose to, don t 
amount to much. 

SELECTED TABLES, 

Jean ijh La Fontaine. 

1621-1695 


TRANSGRESSION AND OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 
Sir Guillaume de Balaun was a troubadour who roamed the South of 
France in the Middle Ages, going from castle to castle, reciting poetry, and 
playing the perfect knight. At the castle of Javiac he met and fell in love 
with the beautiful lady of the house, Madame Guillelma de Javiac. He sang 
her his songs, recited his poetry, played chess with her, and little by little 
she in turn fell in love with him. Guillaume had a friend, Sir Pierre de Bar- 
jac, who traveled with him and who was also received at the castle. And 
Pierre too fell in love with a lady in Javiac, die gracious but temperamental 
Viemetta. 

Then one day Pierre and Viemetta had a violent quarrel. The lady 
dismissed him, and he sought out his friend Guillaume to help heal the 
breach and get him back in her good graces. Guillaume was about to leave 
the castle for a while, but on his return, several weeks later, he worked bis 
magic, and Pierre and the lady were reconciled. Pierre felt that his love 
had increased tenfold—that there was no stronger love, in fact, than the 
love that follows reconciliation. The stronger and longer the disagreement, 
he told Guillaume, the sweeter the feeling that comes with peace and 
rapprochement. 

As a troubadour, Sir Guillaume prided himself on experiencing all the 
joys and sorrows of love. On hearing his friend’s talk, he too wanted know 
the bliss of reconciliation after a quarrel. He therefore feigned great anger 
with Lady Guillelma, stopped sending her love letters, and abruptly left the 
castle and stayed away, even during the festivals and hunts. This drove the 
young lady wild. 

Guillelma sent messengers to Guillaume to find out what had hap¬ 
pened, but he turned the messengers away. He thought all this would make 
her angry, forcing him to plead for reconciliation as Pierre had. Instead, 
however, his absence had the opposite effect: It made Guillelma love him 
all the more. Now the lady pursued her knight, sending messengers and 
love notes of her own. This was almost unheard of—a lady never pursued 
her troubadour. And Guillaume did not like it. Guillelma’s forwardness 
made him feel she had lost some of her dignity. Not only was he no longer 
sure of his plan, he was no longer sure of his lady. 

Finally, after several months of not hearing from Guillaume, Guillelma 
gave up. She sent him no more messengers, and he began to wonder—per¬ 
haps she was angry? Perhaps the plan had worked after all? So much the 
better if she was. He would wait no more—it was time to reconcile. So he 
put on his best robe, decked the horse in its fanciest caparison, chose a 
magnificent helmet, and rode off to Javiac. 

On hearing that her beloved had returned, Guillelma rushed to see 
him, knelt before him, dropped her veil to kiss him, and begged forgive 
ness for whatever slight had caused his anger. Imagine his confusion and 
despair—his plan had failed abysmally. She was not angry, she had never 
been angry, she was only deeper in love, and he would never experience 
the joy of reconciliation after a quarrel. Seeing her now, and still desperate 


116 


LAW 16 




to taste that joy, he decided to try one more time: He drove her away with 
harsh words and threatening gestures. She left, this time vowing never to 
see him again. 

The next morning the troubadour regretted what he had done. He 
rode back to Javiac, but the lady would not receive him, and ordered her 
servants to chase him away, across the drawbridge and over the hill. Guil¬ 
laume fled, Back in his chamber he collapsed and started to cry: He had 
made a terrible mistake. Over the next year, unable to see his lady, he ex¬ 
perienced the absence, the terrible absence, tin at can only inflame love. He 
wrote one of his most beautiful poems, “My song ascends for mercy pray¬ 
ing.” And he sent many letters to Guillelma, explaining what he had done, 
and begging forgiveness. 

After a great deal of this. Lady Guillelma, remembering his beautiful 
songs, his handsome figure, and his skills in dancing and falconry, found 
herself yearning to have him back. As penance for his cruelty, she ordered 
him to remove the nail from the little finger of his right hand, and to send it 
to her along with a poem describing his miseries. 

He did as she asked. Finally Guillaume de Balaun was able to taste the 
ultimate sensation—a reconciliation even surpassing that of his friend 
Pierre. 

Interpretation 

Trying to discover the joys of reconciliation, Guillaume de Balaun inadver¬ 
tently experienced the truth of the law of absence and presence. At the 
start of an affair, you need to heighten your presence in the eyes of the 
other. If you absent yourself too early, you may be forgotten. But once 
your lover s emotions are engaged, and the feeling of love has crystallized, 
absence inflames and excites. Giving no reason for your absence excites 
even more: The other person assumes he or she is at fault. While you are 
away, the lover’s imagination takes flight, and a stimulated imagination 
cannot help but make love grow stronger. Conversely, the more Guillelma 
pursued Guillaume, the less he loved her—she had become too present, 
too accessible, leaving no room for his imagination and fancy, so that his 
feelings were suffocating. When she finally stopped sending messengers, 
he was able to breathe again, and to return to his plan. 

What withdraws, what becomes scarce, suddenly seems to deserve our 
respect and honor. What stays too long, inundating us with its presence, 
makes us disdain it. In the Middle Ages, ladies were constantly putting 
their knights through trials of love, sending them on some long and ardu¬ 
ous quest-all to create a pattern of absence and presence. Indeed, had 
Guillaume not left his lady in the first place, she might have been forced to 
send him away, creating an absence of her own. 

Absence diminishes minor passions and, inflames great ones, 
as the wind douses a candle and fans a fire. 

La Rochefoucauld, 16} 3~1680 


l- m- VIKTl KS 01- 
THK COCK 

While serving under 
the Duke Ai of Liu 
Tien Juo, resenting his 
obscure position, said 
to his muster\ "1 am 
going to wander far 
away like a snow 
goose." 

"What do you mean by 
that?" inquired the 
Duke. 

'Do you see the cock?" 
said Tien Juo in reply. 

“ Its crest is a symbol of 
civility; its powerful 
talons suggest strength: 
its daring to fight any 
enemy denotes 
courage; its instinct to 
invite others whenever 
food is obtained shows 
benevolence; and, lust 
but not least , its punc¬ 
tuality in keeping the 
time through the night 
gives us an example of 
veracity. In spite, 
howe vcr. of these five 
virtues . the cock is daily 
killed to fill a dish on 
your table. Why? The 
reason is that it is 
found, within our reach. 
On (he other hand, the 
snow goose traverses in 
one flight a thousand li. 
Resting in your garden, 
it preys on your fishes 
and turtles and pecks 
your millet. Though 
devoid of any of the 
cock’s five virtues, yet 
you prize this bird for 
the sake of its scarcity. 
This being so. I .shall fly 
far like a snow goose " 

ANCIENT CHINESE 
PAR A HUES, 

Yu Hsiu Sen. ki).. 

3 974 


LAW 16 111 



OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

For many centuries the Assyrians ruled upper Asia with an iron fist. In the 
eighth century B.C., however, the people of Medea (now northwestern 
Iran) revolted against them, and finally broke free. Now the Medes had to 
establish a new government. Determined to avoid any form of despotism, 
they refused to give ultimate power to any one man, or to establish a 
monarchy. Without a leader, however, the country soon fell into chaos, 
and fractured into small kingdoms, with village fighting against village. 

In one such village lived a man named Deioces, who began to make a 
name for himself for fair dealing and the ability to settle disputes. 

He did this so successfully, in fact, that soon any legal conflict in the 
area was brought to him, and his power increased. Throughout the land, 
the law had fallen into disrepute—the judges were corrupt, and no one en¬ 
trusted their cases to the courts any more, resorting to violence instead. 
When news spread of Deioces’ wisdom, incorruptibility, and unshakable 
impartiality, Medean villages far and wide turned to him to settle all man¬ 
ner of cases. Soon he became the sole arbiter of justice in the land. 

At the height of his power, Deioces suddenly decided he had had 
enough. He would no longer sit in the chair of judgment, would hear no 
more suits, settle no more disputes between brother and brother, village 
and village. Complaining that he was spending so much time dealing with 
other people’s problems that he had neglected his own affairs, he retired. 
The country once again descended into chaos. With the sudden with¬ 
drawal of a powerful arbiter like Deioces, crime increased, and contempt 
for the law was never greater. The Medes held a meeting of all the villages 
to decide how to get out of their predicament. “We cannot continue to live 
in this country under these conditions,” said one tribal leader. “Let us ap¬ 
point one of our number to rule so that we can live under orderly govern¬ 
ment, rather than losing our homes altogether in the present chaos.” 

And so, despite all that the Medes had suffered under the Assyrian des¬ 
potism, they decided to set up a monarchy and name a king. And the man 
they most wanted to rule, of course, was the fair-minded Deioces. He was 
hard to convince, for he wanted nothing more to do with the villages’ in¬ 
fighting and bickering, but the Medes begged and pleaded—without him the 
country had descended into a state of lawlessness. Deioces finally agreed. 

Yet he also imposed conditions. An enormous palace was to be con¬ 
structed for him, he was to be provided with bodyguards, and a capital city 
was to be built from which he could rule. All of this was done, and Deioces 
settled into his palace. In the center of the capital, the palace was sur¬ 
rounded by walls, and completely inaccessible to ordinary people. Deioces 
then established the terms of his rule: Admission to his presence was for¬ 
bidden. Communication with the king was only possible through messen¬ 
gers. No one in the royal court could see him more than once a week, and 
then only by permission. 

Deioces ruled for fifty-three years, extended the Medean empire, and 
established the foundation for what would later be the Persian empire, 
under his great-great-grandson Cyrus. During Deioces’ reign, the people’s 



respect for him gradually turned into a form of worship: He was not a mere 
mortal, they believed, but the son of a god. 

Interpretation 

Deioces was a man of great ambition. He determined early on that the 
country needed a strong ruler, and that he was the man for the job. 

In a land plagued with anarchy, the most powerful man is the judge 
and arbiter. So Deioces began his career by making his reputation as a man 
of impeccable fairness. 

At the height of his power as a judge, however, Deioces realized the 
truth of the law of absence and presence: By serving so many clients, he 
had become too noticeable, too available, and had lost the respect he had 
earlier enjoyed. People were taking his services for granted. The only way 
to regain the veneration and power he wanted was to withdraw com¬ 
pletely, and let the Medes taste what life was like without him. As he ex¬ 
pected, they came begging for him to rule. 

Once Deioces had discovered the truth of this law, he carried it to its 
ultimate realization. In the palace his people had built for him, none could 
see him except a few courtiers, and those only rarely. As Herodotus wrote, 
“There was a risk that if drey saw him habitually, it might lead to jealousy 
and resentment, and plots would follow; but if nobody saw him, the legend 
would grow that he was a being of a different order from mere men.” 

A man said to a Dervish: “Why do I not see you more often?” The Dervish 
replied > “Because the words ‘ Why have you not been to see me?' are 
sweeter to my ear than the words *Why have you come again?’” 

Multa fami, quoted in /dries Shah s Caravan of Dreams., 1968 


KEYS TO POWER 

Everything in the world depends on absence and presence. A strong pres¬ 
ence will draw power and attention to you—you shine more brighdy than 
those around you. But a point is inevitably reached where too much pres¬ 
ence creates the opposite effect: The more you are seen and heard from, 
the more your value degrades. You become a habit No matter how hard 
you try to be different, subdy, without your knowing why, people respect 
you less and less. At the right moment you must learn to withdraw yourself 
before they unconsciously push you away. It is a game of hide-and-seek. 
The truth of this law can most easily be appreciated in matters of love 
and seduction. In the beginning stages of an affair, the lover’s absence stim¬ 
ulates your imagination, forming a sort of aura around him or her. But this 
aura fades when you know too much—when your imagination no longer 
has room to roam. The loved one becomes a person like anyone else, a 
person whose presence is taken for granted. This is why the seventeenth- 
century French courtesan Ninon de Lenclos advised constant feints at with¬ 
drawal from one’s lover. “Love never dies of starvation,” she wrote, “but 
often of indigestion.” 



The moment you allow yourself to be treated like anyone else, it is too 
late—you are swallowed and digested. To prevent this you need to starve 
the other person of your presence. Force their respect by threatening them 
with the possibility that they will lose you for good; create a pattern of pres¬ 
ence and absence. 

Once you die, everything about you will seem different You will be 
surrounded by an instant aura of respect. People will remember their criti¬ 
cisms of you, their arguments with you, and will be filled with regret and 
guilt. They are missing a presence that will never return. But you do not 
have to wait until you die: By completely withdrawing for a while, you cre¬ 
ate a kind of death before death. And when you come back, it will be as if 
you had come back from the dead—an air of resurrection will cling to you, 
and people will be relieved at your return. This is how Deioces made him¬ 
self king. 

Napoleon was recognizing the law of absence and presence when he 
said, “If I am often seen at the theater, people will cease to notice me.” 
Today, in a world inundated with presence through the flood of images, the 
game of withdrawal is all the more powerful. We rarely know when to 
withdraw* anymore, and nothing seems private, so we are awed by anyone 
who is able to disappear by choice. Novelists J. D. Salinger and Thomas 
Pynchon have created cultlike followings by knowing when to disappear. 

Another, more everyday side of this law, but one that demonstrates 
its truth even further, is the law of scarcity in the science of economics. 
By withdrawing something from the market, you create instant value. In 
seventeenth-century Holland, the upper classes wanted to make the tulip 
more than just a beautiful flower—they wanted it to be a kind of status sym¬ 
bol. Making the flower scarce, indeed almost impossible to obtain, they 
sparked what was later called tuiipomania. A single flower was now worth 
more than its weight in gold. In our own century, similarly, the art dealer 
Joseph Duveen insisted on making the paintings he sold as scarce and rare 
as possible. To keep then prices elevated and their status high, he bought up 
whole collections and stored them in his basement. The paintings that he 
sold became more than just paintings—they were fetish objects, their value 
increased by their rarity. “You can get all the pictures you want at fifty thou¬ 
sand dollars apiece—that’s easy,” he once said. “But to get pictures at a 
quarter of a million apiece—that wants doing!” 


Image: 

The Sun. It can only be 
appreciated by its absence. 

The longer the days of rain, the 
more the sun is craved. But too many 
hot days and the sun overwhelms. 
Learn to keep yourself obscure and 
make people demand your return. 




Extend the law of scarcity to your own skills. Make what you are offer¬ 
ing the world rare and hard to find, and you instantly increase its value. 

There always comes a moment when those in power overstay their 
welcome. We have grown tired of them, lost respect for them; we see them 
as no different from the rest of mankind, which is to say that we see them as 
rather worse, since we inevitably compare their current status in our eyes 
to their former one. There is an art to knowing when to retire. If it is done 
right, you regain the respect you had lost, and retain a part of your power. 

The greatest ruler of the sixteenth century was Charles V King of 
Spain, Hapsburg emperor, he governed an empire that at one point in¬ 
cluded much of Europe and the New World. Yet at the height of his power, 
in 1557, he retired to the monastery of Yuste. All of Europe was captivated 
by his sudden withdrawal; people who had hated and feared him suddenly 
called him great, and he came to be seen as a saint. In more recent times, 
the film actress Greta Garbo was never more admired than when she re¬ 
tired, in 1941. For some her absence came too soon—she was in her mid¬ 
thirties—but she wisely preferred to leave on her own terms, rather than 
waiting for her audience to grow tired of her. 

Make yourself too available and the aura of power you have created 
around yourself will wear away. Turn the game around: Make yourself less 
accessible and you increase the value of your presence. 


Authority: 

Use absence to create 
, respect and esteem. If presence 
diminishes fame, absence augments it. 

A man who when absent is regarded as a 
lion becomes when present something com¬ 
mon and ridiculous. Talents lose their luster 
if we become too familiar with them, for the 
outer shell of the mind is more readily seen 
than its rich inner kernel. Even the outstand¬ 
ing genius makes use of retirement so that 
men may honor him and so that the 
yearning aroused by his absence 
may cause him to be esteemed. 

(Baltasar Gracian, 
1601-1658) 


LAW 16 121 



REVERSAL 

This law only applies once a certain level of power has been attained. The 
need to withdraw only comes after you have established your presence; 
leave too early and you do not increase your respect, you are simply for¬ 
gotten. When you are first entering onto the world’s stage, create an image 
that is recognizable, reproducible, and is seen everywhere. Until that status 
is attained, absence is dangerous—instead of fanning the flames, it will ex¬ 
tinguish them. 

In love and seduction, similarly, absence is only effective once you 
have surrounded the other with your image, been seen by him or her 
everywhere. Everything must remind your lover of your presence, so that 
when you do choose to be away, the lover will always be thinking of you, 
will always be seeing you in his or her mind’s eye. 

Remember: In the beginning, make yourself not scarce but om¬ 
nipresent. Only what is seen, appreciated, and loved will be missed in its 
absence. 



LAW 



KEEP OTHERS IN 
SUSPENDED TERROR: 
CULTIVATE AN AIR OF 
UNPREDICTABILITY 


JUDGMENT 

Humans are creatures of habit with an insatiable need to 
see familiarity in other people's actions . Your predictabil¬ 
ity gives them a sense of control . Turn ike tables: Be de¬ 
liberately unpredictable. Behavior that seems to have no 
consistency or purpose will keep them off-balance, and 
they will wear themselves out trying to explain your 
moves. Taken to an extnetne, this strategy can intimidate 
and terrorize. 



OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

In May of 1972, chess champion Boris Spassky anxiously awaited his rival 
Bobby Fischer in Reykjavik, Iceland. The two men had been scheduled to 
meet for the World Championship of Chess, but Fischer had not arrived on 
time and the match was on hold. Fischer had problems with the size of the 
prize money, problems with the way the money was to be distributed, 
problems with the logistics of holding the match in Iceland. He might back 
out at any moment. 

Spassky tried to be patient. His Russian bosses felt that Fischer was hu¬ 
miliating him and told him to walk away, but Spassky wanted this match. 
He knew he could destroy Fischer, and nothing was going to spoil the 
greatest victory of his career. “So it seems that all our work may come to 
nothing,” Spassky told a comrade. “But what can we do? It is Bobby’s 
move. If he comes, we play. If he does not come; we do not play. A man 
who is willing to commit suicide has the initiative.” 

Fischer finally arrived in Reykjavik, but the problems, and the threat 
of cancellation, continued. He disliked the hall where the match was to be 
fought, he criticized the lighting, he complained about the noise of the 
cameras, he even hated the chairs in which he and Spassky were to sit 
Now the Soviet Union took the initiative and threatened to withdraw their 
man. 

The bluff apparently worked: After all the weeks of waiting, the end¬ 
less and infuriating negotiations, Fischer agreed to play. Everyone was re¬ 
lieved, no one more than Spassky. But on the day of the official 
introductions, Fischer arrived very late, and on the day when the “Match 
of the Century” was to begin, he was late again. This time, however, the 
consequences would be dire: If he showed up too late he would forfeit the 
first game. What was going on? Was he playing some sort of mind game? 
Or was Bobby Fischer perhaps afraid of Boris Spassky? It seemed to the as¬ 
sembled grand masters, and to Spassky, that this young kid from Brooklyn 
had a terrible case of the jitters. At 5:09 Fischer showed up, exactly one 
minute before the match was to be canceled. 

The first game of a chess tournament is critical, since it sets the tone for 
the months to come. It is often a slow and quiet struggle, with the two play¬ 
ers preparing themselves for the war and trying to read each other’s strate¬ 
gies. This game was different. Fischer made a terrible move early on, 
perhaps the worst of his career, and when Spassky had him on the ropes, 
he seemed to give up. Yet Spassky knew that Fischer never gave up. Even 
when facing checkmate, he fought to the bitter end, wearing the opponent 
down. This time, though, he seemed resigned. Then suddenly he broke out 
a bold move that put the room in a buzz. The move shocked Spassky, but 
he recovered and managed to win the game. But no one could figure out 
what Fischer was up to. Had he lost deliberately? Or was he rattled? Unset¬ 
tled? Even, as some thought, insane? 

After his defeat in the first game, Fischer complained all the more 
loudly about the room, the cameras, and everything else. He also failed to 



show up on time for the second game. This time the organizers had had 
enough: He was given a forfeit. Now he was down two games to none, a 
position from which no one had ever come back to win a chess champi¬ 
onship. Fischer was clearly unhinged. Yet in the third game, as all those 
who witnessed it remember, he had a ferocious look in his eye, a look that 
clearly bothered Spassky. And despite the hole he had dug for himself, he 
seemed supremely confident. He did make what appeared to be another 
blunder, as he had in the first game—but his cocky air made Spassky smell 
a trap. Yet despite the Russian’s suspicions, he could not figure out the trap, 
and before he knew it Fischer had checkmated him. In fact Fischer’s un¬ 
orthodox tactics had completely unnerved his opponent. At the end of the 
game, Fischer leaped up and rushed out, yelling to his confederates as he 
smashed a fist into his palm, “I’m crushing him with brute force!” 

In the next games Fischer pulled moves that no one had seen from 
him before, moves that were not his style. Now Spassky started to make 
blunders. After losing the sixth game, he started to cry. One grand master 
said, “After this, Spassky’s got to ask himself if it’s safe to go back to Rus¬ 
sia.” After the eighth game Spassky decided he knew what was happening: 
Bobby Fischer was hypnotizing him. He decided not to look Fischer in the 
eye; he lost anyway. 

After the fourteenth game he called a staff conference and announced, 
“An attempt is being made to control my mind.” He wondered whether the 
orange juice they drank at the chess table could have been drugged. 
Maybe chemicals were being blown into the air. Finally Spassky went pub¬ 
lic, accusing the Fischer team of putting something in the chairs that was al¬ 
tering Spassky’s mind. The KGB went on alert: Boris Spassky was 
embarrassing the Soviet Union! 

The chairs were taken apart and X-rayed. A chemist found nothing 
unusual in them. The only things anyone found anywhere, in fact, were 
two dead flies in a lighting fixture. Spassky began to complain of hallucina¬ 
tions. He tried to keep playing, but his mind was unraveling. He could not 
go on. On September 2, he resigned. Although still relatively young, he 
never recovered from this defeat 

Interpretation 

In previous games between Fischer and Spassky, Fischer had not fared 
well. Spassky had an uncanny ability to read his opponent’s strategy and 
use it against him. Adaptable and patient, he would build attacks that would 
defeat not in seven moves but in seventy. He defeated Fischer every time 
they played because he saw much further ahead, and because he was a bril¬ 
liant psychologist who never lost control. One master said, “He doesn’t just 
look for the best move. He looks for the move that will disturb the man he 
is playing.” 

Fischer, however, finally understood that this was one of the keys to 
Spassky’s success: He played on your predictability, defeated you at your 
own game. Everything Fischer did for the championship match was an at- 



tempt to put the initiative on his side and to keep Spassky off-balance. 
Clearly the endless waiting had an effect on Spassky’s psyche. Most power¬ 
ful of all, though, were Fischer’s deliberate blunders and his appearance of 
having no clear strategy. In fact, he was doing everything he could to 
scramble his old patterns, even if it meant losing the first match and forfeit¬ 
ing the second. 

Spassky was known for his sangfroid and levelheadedness, but for the 
first time in his life he could not figure out his opponent. He slowly melted 
down, until at the end he was the one who seemed insane. 

Chess contains the concentrated essence of life: First, because to win 
you have to be supremely patient and farseeing; and second, because the 
game is built on patterns, whole sequences of moves that have been played 
before and will be played again, with slight alterations, in any one match. 
Your opponent analyzes the patterns you are playing and uses them to try 
to foresee your moves. Allowing him nothing predictable to base his strat¬ 
egy on gives you a big advantage. In chess as in life, when people cannot 
figure out what you are doing, they are kept in a state of terror—waiting, 
uncertain, confused. 

Life at court is a serious, melancholy game of chess, which requires us to draw 
up our pieces and batteries, form apian, pursue it, parry that of our 
adversary. Sometimes, however, it is better to take risks 
and play the most capricious, unpredictable move. 

jean de I,a Bruy ere, 1645-1696 


KEYS TO POWER 

Nothing is more terrifying than the sudden and unpredictable. That is why 
we are so frightened by earthquakes and tornadoes: We do not know when 
they will strike. After one has occurred, we wait in terror for the next one. 
To a lesser degree, this is the effect that unpredictable human behavior has 
on us. 

Animals behave in set patterns, which is why we are able to hunt and 
kill them. Only man has the capacity to consciously alter his behavior, to 
improvise and overcome the weight of routine and habit. Yet most men do 
not realize this power. They prefer the comforts of routine, of giving in to 
the animal nature that has them repeating the same compulsive actions 
time and time again. They do this because it requires no effort, and be¬ 
cause they mistakenly believe that if they do not unsettle others, they will 
be left alone. Understand: A person of power instills a kind of fear by delib¬ 
erately unsettling those around him to keep the initiative on his side. You 
sometimes need to strike without warning, to make others tremble when 
they least expect it. It is a device that the powerful have used for centuries. 

Filippo Maria, the last of the Visconti dukes of Milan in fifteenth- 
century Italy, consciously did the opposite of what everyone expected of 
him. For instance, he might suddenly shower a courtier with attention, and 
then, once the man had come to expect a promotion to higher office, 



would suddenly start treating him with the utmost disdain. Confused, the 
man might leave the court, when the duke would suddenly recall him and 
start treating him well again. Doubly contused, the courtier would wonder 
whether his assumption that he would be promoted had become obvious, 
and offensive, to the duke, and would start to behave as if he no longer ex- 
peeled such honor. The duke would rebuke him for his lade of ambition 
and would send him away. 

The secret of dealing with Filippo was simple: Do not presume to 
know what he wants. Do not try to guess what will please him. Never inject 
your will; just surrender to his will Then wait to see what happens. Amidst 
the confusion and uncertainty he created, the duke ruled supreme, unchal¬ 
lenged and at peace. 

Unpredictability is most often the tactic of the master, but the under¬ 
dog too can use it to great effect. If you find yourself outnumbered or cor¬ 
nered, throw in a series of unpredictable moves. Your enemies will be so 
confused that they will pull back or make a tactical blunder. 

In the spring of 1862, during the American Civil War, General 
Stonewall Jackson and a force of 4,600 Confederate soldiers were torment¬ 
ing the larger Union forces in the Shenandoah Valley. Meanwhile, not far 
away, General George Brinton McClellan, heading a force of 90,000 
Union soldiers, was marching south from Washington, D.C., to lay siege to 
Richmond, Virginia, the Confederate capital As the weeks of the cam¬ 
paign went by, Jackson repeatedly led his soldiers out of the Shenandoah 
Valley, then back to it. 

His movements made no sense. Was he preparing to help defend 
Richmond? Was he marching on Washington, now that McClellan’s ab¬ 
sence had left it unprotected? Was he heading north to wreak havoc up 
there? Why was his small force moving in circles? 

Jackson’s inexplicable moves made the Union generals delay the 
march on Richmond as they waited to figure out what he was up to. Mean¬ 
while, the South was able to pour reinforcements into the town. A battle 
that could have crushed the Confederacy turned into a stalemate. Jackson 
used this tactic time and again when facing numerically superior forces. 
“Always mystify, mislead, and surprise the enemy, if possible,” he said, 
\ ., such tactics will win every time and a small army may thus destroy a 
large one.” 

This law applies not only to war but to everyday situations. People are 
always trying to read the motives behind your actions and to use your pre¬ 
dictability against you. Throw in a completely inexplicable move and you 
put them on the defensive. Because they do not understand you, they are 
unnerved, and in such a state you can easily intimidate them. 

Pablo Picasso once remarked, “The best calculation is the absence of 
calculation. Once you have attained a certain level of recognition, others 
generally figure that when you do something, it’s for an intelligent reason. 
So it’s really foolish to plot out your movements too carefully in advance. 
You’re better off acting capriciously ” 

For a while, Picasso worked with the art dealer Paul Rosenberg. At first 



he allowed him a fair amount of latitude in handling his paintings, then one 
day, for no apparent reason, he told the man he would no longer give him 
any work to sell. As Picasso explained, “Rosenberg would spend the next 
forty-eight hours trying to figure out why. Was I reserving things for some 
other dealer? I’d go on working and sleeping and Rosenberg would spend 
his time figuring. In two days he’d come back, nerves jangled, anxious, say¬ 
ing, ‘After all, dear friend, you wouldn’t turn me down if I offered you this 
much [naming a substantially higher figure] for those paintings rather than 
the price I’ve been accustomed to paying you, would you?’ * 

Unpredictability is not only a weapon of terror: Scrambling your pat¬ 
terns on a day-to-day basis will cause a stir around you and stimulate inter¬ 
est. People will talk about you, ascribe motives and explanations that have 
nothing to do with the truth, but that keep you constandy in their minds. In 
the end, the more capricious you appear, the more respect you will gamer. 
Only the terminally subordinate act in a predictable manner 


Image: The Cyclone. A 
wind that cannot be fore¬ 
seen. Sudden shifts in 
the barometer, in¬ 
explicable changes 
in direction and 
velocity. There is 
no defense: A 
cyclone sows 
terror and 
confusion. 


Authority; The enlightened ruler is so mysterious that he seems 
to dwell nowhere, so inexplicable that no one can seek him. 
He reposes in nonaction above, and his ministers tremble 
below. (Han-fei-tzu, Chinese philosopher, third century B.c.) 



REVERSAL 

Sometimes predictability can work in your favor: By creating a pattern for 
people to be familiar and comfortable with, you can lull them to sleep. 
They have prepared everything according to their preconceived notions 
about you. You can use this in several ways: First, it sets up a smoke screen, 
a comfortable front behind which you can carry on deceptive actions. Sec¬ 
ond, it allows you on rare occasions to do something completely against 
the pattern, unsettling your opponent so deeply he will fall to the ground 
without being pushed. 

In 1974 Muhammad Ali and George Foreman were scheduled to fight 
for the world heavyweight boxing championship. Everyone knew what 
would happen: Big George Foreman would try to land a knockout punch 
while Ali would dance around him, wearing him out. That was All’s way of 
fighting, his pattern, and he had not changed it in more than ten years. But 
in this case it seemed to give Foreman the advantage: He had a devastating 
punch, and if he waited, sooner or later Ali would have to come to him. 
Ali, the master strategist, had other plans: In press conferences before the 
big fight, he said he was going to change his style and punch it out with 
Foreman. No one, least of all Foreman, believed this for a second. That 
plan would be suicide on Ali’s part; he was playing the comedian, as usual. 
Then, before the fight, Ali’s trainer loosened the ropes around the ring, 
something a trainer would do if his boxer were intending to slug it out. But 
no one believed this ploy; it had to be a setup. 

To everyone’s amazement, Ali did exactly what he had said he would 
do. As Foreman waited for him to dance around, Ali went right up to him 
and slugged it out. He completely upset his opponent’s strategy. At a loss, 
Foreman ended up wearing himself out, not by chasing Ali but by throw¬ 
ing punches wildly, and taking more and more counterpunches. Finally, 
Ali landed a dramatic right cross that knocked out Foreman. The habit of 
assuming that a person’s behavior will fit its previous patterns is so strong 
that not even All’s announcement of a strategy change was enough to upset 
it. Foreman walked into a trap—the trap he had been told to expect. 

A warning: Unpredictability can work against you sometimes, es¬ 
pecially if you are in a subordinate position. There are times when it is bet¬ 
ter to let people feel comfortable and settled around you than to disturb 
them. Too much unpredictability will be seen as a sign of indecisiveness, or 
even of some more serious psychic problem. Patterns are powerful, and 
you can terrify people by disrupting them. Such power should only be 
used judiciously. 



LAW 


18 

DO NOT BUILD FORTRESSES 
TO PROTECT YOURSELF— 
ISOLATION IS DANGEROUS 

JUDGMENT 

The world is dangerous and enemies are everywhere — 
everyone has to protect themselves. A fortress seems the 
safest. But isolation exposes you to more dangers than it 
protects you from—it cuts you offfrom valuable informa¬ 
tionit makes you conspicuous and an easy target Better 
to circulate among people, find allies, mingle. You are 
shielded from your enemies by the crowd. 




TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

Ch’in Shih Huang Ti, the first emperor of China {221-210 B.C.), was the 
mightiest man of his day. His empire was vaster and more powerful than 
that of Alexander the Great. He had conquered all of the kingdoms sur¬ 
rounding his own kingdom of Ch’in and unified them into one massive 
realm called China. But in the last years of his life, few, if anyone, saw him. 

The emperor lived in the most magnificent palace built to that date, in 
(he capital of Hsien-yang. The palace had 270 pavilions; all of these were 
connected by secret underground passageways, allowing the emperor to 
move through the palace without anyone seeing him. He slept in a differ¬ 
ent room every night, and anyone who inadvertently laid eyes on him was 
instantly beheaded. Only a handful of men knew his whereabouts, and if 
they revealed it to anyone, they, too, were put to death. 

The first emperor had grown so terrified of human contact that when 
he had to leave the palace he traveled incognito, disguising himself care¬ 
fully. On one such trip through the provinces, he suddenly died. His body 
was borne back to the capital in the emperor’s carriage, with a cart packed 
with salted fish trailing behind it to cover up the smell of the rotting 
corpse—no one was to know of his death. He died alone, far from his 
wives, his family, his friends, and his courtiers, accompanied only by a 
minister and a handful of eunuchs. 

Interpretation 

Shih Huang Ti started off as the king of Ch’in, a fearless warrior of unbri¬ 
dled ambition. Writers of the time described him as a man with “a waspish 
nose, eyes like slits, the voice of a jackal, and the heart of a tiger or wolf.” 
He could be merciful sometimes, but more often he “swallowed men up 
without a scruple.” It was through trickery and violence that he conquered 
the provinces surrounding his own and created China, forging a single na¬ 
tion and culture out of many. He broke up the feudal system, and to keep 
an eye on the many members of the royal families that were scattered 
across the realm’s various kingdoms, he moved 120,000 of them to the cap¬ 
ital, where he housed the most important courtiers in the vast palace of 
Hsien-yang. He consolidated the many walls on the borders and built them 
into the Great Wall of China. He standardized the country’s laws, its writ¬ 
ten language, even the size of its cartwheels. 

As part of this process of unification, however, the first emperor out¬ 
lawed the writings and teachings of Confucius, the philosopher whose 
ideas on the moral life had already become virtually a religion in Chinese 
culture. On Shih Huang Ti’s order, thousands of books relating to Confu¬ 
cius were burned, and anyone who quoted Confucius was to be beheaded. 
This made many enemies for the emperor, and he grew constantly afraid, 
even paranoid. The executions mounted. A contemporary, the writer Han 
fei-tzu, noted that “Ch’in has been victorious for four generations, yet has 
lived in constant terror and apprehension of destruction.” 

As the emperor withdrew deeper and deeper into the palace to protect 


11 IK MAK(,M K 01' Till'. 
HKI) DKAT! I 

The “Red Death" had 
long devastated the 
country. No pestilence 
hud ever been so filial, 
or so hideous. Blood 
was its Avatar and its 
seal-—the redness and 
horror of blood. There 
were sharp pains, and 
sudden dizziness, and 
(hen profuse bleeding 
at the pores, with 
dissolution.... And 
the whole seizure, 
progress, and termina¬ 
tion of the disease, were 
the incidents of half an 
hour. 

But the Prince Pros- 
pero was happy and 
dauntless and saga¬ 
cious. When his domin¬ 
ions were half- 
depopulated, he 
summoned to his 
presence a thousand 
hale and light-hearted 
friends front among the 
knights and dames of 
his court, and with 
these retired io the deep 
seclusion of one of his 
castellated abbeys■ This 
was an extensive and 
magn ificeri t stru dure, 
the creation of (he 
prince's own eccentric 
yet august taste. A. 
strong and lofty wall 
girdled it in. This wall 
had gates of iron. The 
courtiers, having 
entered, brought 
furnaces and massy 
hammers and welded 
the bolts. They resolved 
to leave, means neither 
of ingress nor egress to 
the sudden impulses of 
despair or of frenzy 
from within. The 
abbey was amply 
provisioned. With such 


LAW 18 


131 



precautions the 
courtiers might bid 
defiance to contagion. 
The external world 
could take care, of 
itself. In the meantime 
it was folly to grieve, 
or to think. The prince 
had provided all the 
appliances of pleasure. 
There were buffoons, 
there were impro- 
visatori, there were 
ballet-dancers , there 
were musicians , there 
was Beauty, there ivos 
wine. All these and 
security were within. 
Without was the 
"Red Death.*’ 
ft was toward the close 
of the fifth or sixth 
month of his seclusion, 
and while the pestilence 
raged most furiously 
abroad, that the Prince 
Praspero entertained 
his thousand friends at 
a masked ball of the. 
most unusual magnifi¬ 
cence. It a volup¬ 
tuous scene, that 
masquerade.... 

... And the revel went 
whirtingly on, until at 
length there com¬ 
menced the sounding 
of midnight upon the 
dock.... Ami thus too, 
it happened, perhaps, 
that before the last 
echoes of the last chime 
had utterly sunk into 
silence, there were 
many individuals in the 
crowd who had found 
leisure to become 
aware of the presence 
of a masked figure 
which had arrested the 
attention of no single 
individual before .... 
The figure was tall and 
gaunt, and shrouded 
from head to foot in 
the habiliments of the 
grave. The mask which 
concealed the visage 

132 LAW 18 


himself, he slowly lost control of the realm. Eunuchs and ministers enacted 
political policies without his approval or even his knowledge; they also 
plotted against him. By the end, he was emperor in name only, and was so 
isolated that barely anyone knew he had died. He had probably been poi¬ 
soned by the same scheming ministers who encouraged his isolation. 

That is what isolation brings: Retreat into a fortress and you lose con¬ 
tact with the sources of your power. You lose your ear for what is happen¬ 
ing around you, as well as a sense of proportion. Instead of being safer, you 
cut yourself off from the kind of knowledge on which your life depends. 
Never enclose yourself so far from the streets that you cannot hear what is 
happening around you, including the plots against you. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

Louis XIV had the palace of Versailles built for him and his court in the 
1660s, and it was like no other royal palace in the world. As in a beehive, 
everything revolved around the royal person. He lived surrounded by the 
nobility, who were allotted apartments nesded around his, their closeness 
to him dependent on their rank. The king’s bedroom occupied the literal 
center of the palace and was the focus of everyone’s attention. Every morn¬ 
ing the king was greeted in this room by a ritual known as the lever. 

At eight A.M., the king’s first valet, who slept at the foot of the royal 
bed, would awaken His Majesty. Then pages would open the door and 
admit those who had a function in the lever. The order of their entry was 
precise: First came the king’s illegitimate sons and his grandchildren, then 
the princes and princesses of the blood, and then his physician and sur¬ 
geon. There followed the grand officers of the wardrobe, the king’s official 
reader, and those in charge of entertaining the king. Next would arrive var¬ 
ious government officials, in ascending order of rank. Last but not least 
came those attending the lever by special invitation. By the end of the cere¬ 
mony, the room would be packed with well over a hundred royal atten¬ 
dants and visitors. 

The day was organized so that all the palace’s energy was directed at 
and passed through the king. Louis was constantly attended by courtiers 
and officials, all asking for his advice and judgment. To all their questions 
he usually replied, “I shall see.” 

As Saint-Simon noted, w If he turned to someone, asked him a ques¬ 
tion, made an insignificant remark, the eyes of all present were turned on 
this person. It was a distinction that was talked of and increased prestige.” 
There was no possibility of privacy in the palace, not even for the king— 
every room communicated with another, and every hallway led to larger 
rooms where groups of nobles gathered constantly. Everyone’s actions 
were interdependent, and nothing and no one passed unnoticed: “The 
king not only saw to it that all the high nobility was present at his court,” 
wrote Saint-Simon, “he demanded the same of the minor nobility. At his 
lever and voucher, at his meals, in his gardens of Versailles, he always looked 



about him, noticing everything. He was offended if the most distinguished 
nobles did not live permanently at court, and those who showed them¬ 
selves never or hardly ever, incurred his hill displeasure. If one of these de¬ 
sired something, the king would say proudly: ‘I do not know him,’ and the 
judgment was irrevocable/’ 

Interpretation 

Louis XIV came to power at the end of a terrible civil war, the Fronde. A 
principal instigator of the war had been the nobility, which deeply resented 
the growing power of the throne and yearned for the days of feudalism, 
when the lords ruled their own fiefdoms and the king had little authority 
over them. The nobles had lost the civil war, but they remained a fractious, 
resentful lot. 

The construction of Versailles, then, was far more than the decadent 
whim of a luxury-loving king. It served a crucial function: The king could 
keep an eye and an ear on everyone and everything around him. The 
once proud nobility was reduced to squabbling over the right to help the 
king put on his robes in the morning. There was no possibility here of pri¬ 
vacy—no possibility of isolation. Louis XIV very early grasped the truth 
that for a king to isolate himself is gravely dangerous. In his absence, con¬ 
spiracies will spring up like mushrooms after rain, animosities will crystal¬ 
lize into factions, and rebellion will break out before he has the time to 
react. To combat this, sociability and openness must not only be encour¬ 
aged, they must be formally organized and channeled. 

These conditions at Versailles lasted for Louis’s entire reign, some fifty 
years of relative peace and tranquillity. Through it all, not a pin dropped 
without Louis hearing it 

Solitude is dangerous to reason, without being favorable to virtue, . . . 

Remember that the solitary mortal is certainly luxurious, 
probably superstitious, and possibly mad. 

Dr. Samuel Johnson, 1709-1784 


KEYS TO POWER 

Machiavelli makes the argument that in a stricdy military sense a fortress is 
invariably a mistake. It becomes a symbol of power’s isolation, and is an 
easy target for its builders’ enemies. Designed to defend you, fortresses ac¬ 
tually cut you off from help and cut into your flexibility. They may appear 
impregnable, but once you retire to one, everyone knows where you are; 
and a siege does not have to succeed to turn your fortress into a prison. 
With their small and confined spaces, fortresses are also extremely vulner¬ 
able to the plague and contagious diseases, In a strategic sense, the iso¬ 
lation of a fortress provides no protection, and actually creates more 
problems than it solves. 


was made so nearly to 
resemble the counte¬ 
nance of a stiff ened 
corpse that the closest 
scrutiny must have hud 
difficulty in detecting 
the cheat. Arid yet all 
this might have been 
endured, if not 
approved, by the mad 
revellers around. But 
the mummer had gone 
so far as to assume the 
type of the Red Death. 
His vesture was 

dabbled in blood. and 

his hrotul brow, with alt 
the features of the face, 
was sprinkled with the 
scarlet horror .... 

... A throng of the 
revellers at once threw 
themselves into the 
black apartment, and, 
seizing the mummer, 
whose tall figure stood 
erect and motionless 
within the shadow of 
the ebony clock, gasped 
in unutterable horror at 
finding the grave cere¬ 
ments and corpse-like 
mask, which they 
handled with so violent 
a rudeness, untenamed 
by any tangible form. 
And now was acknowl¬ 
edged the presence of 
the. Red Death. He had 
come like a thief in she 
night. And one by one 
dropped the revellers in 
the blood-bedewed 
halls of their revel, and 
died each in the 
despairing posture of 
his fall. And the life of 
the ebony clock went 
out with that of the last 
of the gay. And the 
flames of the tripods 
expired. And Darkness 
and Decay and the Red 
Death held illimitable 
dominion over all. 

THE masque of the 

RED DEATH, 

Edgar Allan Poe. 
JSG9-1849 


LAW 18 133 



Because humans are social creatures by nature, power depends on so¬ 
cial interaction and circulation. To make yourself powerful you must place 
yourself at the center of things, as Louis XIV did at Versailles. All activity 
should revolve around you, and you should be aware of everything hap¬ 
pening on the street, and of anyone who might be hatching plots against 
you. The danger for most people comes when they feel threatened. In such 
times they tend to retreat and close ranks, to find security in a kind of 
fortress. In doing so, however, they come to rely for information on a 
smaller and smaller circle, and lose perspective on events around them. 
They lose maneuverability and become easy targets, and their isolation 
makes them paranoid. As in warfare and most games of strategy, isolation 
often precedes defeat and death. 

In moments of uncertainty and danger, you need to fight this desire to 
tarn inward. Instead, make yourself more accessible, seek out old allies and 
make new ones, force yourself into more and more different circles. This 
has been the trick of powerful people for centuries. 

The Roman statesman Cicero was bom into the lower nobility, and 
had little chance of power unless he managed to make a place for himself 
among the aristocrats who controlled the city. He succeeded brilliantly, 
identifying everyone with influence and figuring out how they were con¬ 
nected to one another. He mingled everywhere, knew everyone, and had 
such a vast network of connections that an enemy here could easily be 
counterbalanced by an ally there. 

The French statesman Talleyrand played the game the same way. Al¬ 
though he came from one of the oldest aristocratic families in France, he 
made a point of always staying in touch with what was happening in the 
streets of Paris, allowing him to foresee trends and troubles. He even got a 
certain pleasure out of mingling with shady criminal types, who supplied 
him with valuable information. Every time there was a crisis, a transition of 
power—the end of the Directory, the fall of Napoleon, the abdication of 
Louis XVIII—he was able to survive and even thrive, because he never 
dosed himself up in a small circle but always forged connections with the 
new order. 

This law pertains to kings and queens, and to those of the highest 
power: The moment you lose contact with your people, seeking security in 
isolation, rebellion is brewing. Never imagine yourself so elevated that you 
can afford to cut yourself off from even the lowest echelons. By retreating 
to a fortress, you make yourself an easy target for your plotting subjects, 
who view your isolation as an insult and a reason for rebellion. 

Since humans are such social creatures, it follows that the social arts 
that make us pleasant to be around can be practiced only by constant ex¬ 
posure and circulation. The more you are in contact with others, the more 
graceful and at ease you become. Isolation, on the other hand, engenders 
an awkwardness in your gestures, and leads to further isolation, as people 
start avoiding you. 

In 1545 Duke Cosimo I de’ Medici decided that to ensure the immor- 


134 LAW 18 



tality of his name he would commission frescoes for the main chapel of the 
church of San Lorenzo in Florence. He had many great painters to choose 
from, and in the end he picked Jacopo da Pontormo. Getting on in years, 
Pontormo wanted to make these frescoes his chef d’oeuvre and legacy His 
first decision was to close the chapel off with walls, partitions, and blinds. 
He wanted no one to witness the creation of his masterpiece, or to steal his 
ideas. He would outdo Michelangelo himself. When some young men 
broke into the chapel out of curiosity, Jacopo sealed it off even further. 

Pontormo filled the chapel’s ceiling with biblical scenes—the Creation, 
Adam and Eve, Noah’s ark, on and on. At the top of the middle wall he 
painted Christ in his majesty, raising the dead on Judgment Day. The artist 
worked on the chapel for eleven years, rarely leaving it, since he had de¬ 
veloped a phobia for human contact and was afraid his ideas would be 
stolen. 

Pontormo died before completing the frescoes, and none of them has 
survived. But the great Renaissance writer Vasari, a friend of Pontormo's 
who saw the frescoes shortly after the artist’s death, left a description of 
what they looked like. There was a total lack of proportion. Scenes 
bumped against scenes, figures in one story being juxtaposed with those in 
another, in maddening numbers. Pontormo had become obsessed with de¬ 
tail but had lost any sense of the overall composition. Vasari left off his de¬ 
scription of the frescoes by writing that if he continued, “I think I would go 
mad and become entangled in this painting, just as I believe that in the 
eleven years of time Jacopo spent on it, he entangled himself and anyone 
else who saw it” Instead of crowning Pontormo's career, the work became 
his undoing. 

These frescoes were visual equivalents of the effects of isolation on the 
human mind: a loss of proportion, an obsession with detail combined with 
an inability to see the larger picture, a kind of extravagant ugliness that no 
longer communicates. Clearly, isolation is as deadly for the creative arts as 
for the social arts. Shakespeare is the most famous writer in history be¬ 
cause, as a dramatist for the popular stage, he opened himself up to the 
masses, making his work accessible to people no matter what their educa¬ 
tion and taste. Artists who hole themselves up in their fortress lose a sense 
of proportion, their work communicating only to their small circle. Such 
art remains cornered and powerless. 

Finally, since power is a human creation, it is inevitably increased by 
contact with other people. Instead of falling into the fortress mentality, 
view the world in the following manner: It is like a vast Versailles, with 
every room communicating with another. You need to be permeable, able 
to float in and out of different circles and mix with different types. That 
kind of mobility and social contact will protect you from plotters, who will 
be unable to keep secrets from you, and from your enemies, who will be 
unable to isolate you from your allies. Always on the move, you mix and 
mingle in the rooms of the palace, never sitting or settling in one place. No 
hunter can fix his aim on such a swift-moving creature. 


LAW 18 


135 



Image: The Fortress. High 
up on the hill, the citadel be¬ 
comes a symbol of ail that is 
hateful in power and authority. 
The citizens of the town betray 
you to the first enemy that comes. 
Cut off from communication and in- 
telligence, the citadel falls with ease. 


Authority: A good and wise prince, desirous of maintaining that 
character, and to avoid giving the opportunity to his sons to be¬ 
come oppressive, will never build fortresses, so that they may 
place their reliance upon the good will of their subjects, and not 
upon the strength of citadels. (Niccolo Machiavelli, 1469™1527) 


REVERSAL 

It is hardly ever right and propitious to choose isolation. Without keeping 
an ear on what is happening in the streets, you will be unable to protect 
yourself. About the only thing that constant human contact cannot facili¬ 
tate is thought. The weight of society's pressure to conform, and the lack of 
distance from other people, can make it impossible to think clearly about 
what is going on around you. As a temporary recourse, then, isolation can 
help you to gain perspective. Many a serious thinker has been produced in 
prisons, where we have nothing to do but think. Machiavelli could write 
The Prince only once he found himself in exile and isolated on a farm far 
from the political intrigues of Florence. 

The danger is, however, that this kind of isolation will sire all kinds of 
strange and perverted ideas. You may gain perspective on the larger pic¬ 
ture, but you lose a sense of your own smallness and limitations. Also, the 
more isolated you are, the harder it is to break out of your isolation when 
you choose to—it sinks you deep into its quicksand without your noticing. 
If you need time to think, then, choose isolation only as a last resort, and 
only in small doses. Be careful to keep your way back into society open. 



LAW 



KNOW WHO YOU’RE 
DEALING WITH— 
DO NOT OFFEND THE 
WRONG PERSON 


JUDGMENT 

There are many different kinds of people in the world\ 
and you can never assume that everyone will react to 
your strategies in the same way. Deceive or outmaneuver 
some people and they will spend the rest of their lives seek¬ 
ing revenge . They are wolves in lambs * clothing. Choose 
your victims and opponents carefully >, then—never of¬ 
fend or deceive the wrong person. 



When you meet a 
swordsman, draw your 
sword: Do not recite 
poetry to one who is 
not a poet. 

From a Ch'an 
Buddhist classic, 
QUOTED IN 
THUNDER IN THE SKY, 
TRANSLATED BY' 

Thomas Cleary. 1993 


THE KKVT.NCK ()!• 

i.oim-i dl vcuihrk 

[Lope def Aguirre 's 
character is amply 
illustrated in an anec¬ 
dote from the chronicle 
o f Garcilaso de la 
Vega, who related that 
in 1548 Aguirre was a 
member of a platoon of 
soldiers escorting 
Indian slaves from the 
mines at Potosi 
[Bolivia[ to a royal 
treasury depot. The. 
Indians were illegally 
burdened with great 
quantities of silver, and 
a local official arrested 
Aguirre , sentencing 
him to receive two 
hundred lashes in lieu 
of a fine for oppressing 
the Indians. “The 
soldier Aguirre, having 
received a notification 
of the sentence, 
besought the alcalde 
that, instead of flogging 
him, he would put him 
to death, for that he 
was a gentleman by 
birth.... All this had 
no effect on the alcalde, 
who ordered the execu¬ 
tioner to bring a beast, 
and execute the 
sentence. The execu¬ 
tioner came to the 

138 ; LAW 19 


OPPONENTS, SUCKERS, AND VICTIMS: Preliminary Typology 
In your rise to power you will come across many breeds of opponent, 
sucker, and victim. The highest form of the art of power is the ability to dis¬ 
tinguish the wolves from the lambs, the foxes from the hares, the hawks 
from the vultures. If you make this distinction well, you will succeed with¬ 
out needing to coerce anyone too much. But if you deal blindly with 
whomever crosses your path, you will have a life of constant sorrow, if you 
even live that long. Being able to recognize types of people, and to act ac¬ 
cordingly, is critical. The following are the five most dangerous and diffi¬ 
cult types of mark in the jungle, as identified by artists—con and 
otherwise—of the past 

The Arrogant and Proud Man. Although he may initially disguise 
it, this man’s touchy pride makes him very dangerous. Any perceived 
slight will lead to a vengeance of overwhelming violence. You may say to 
yourself, “But I only said such-and-such at a party, where everyone was 
drunk. . . .” It does not matter. There is no sanity behind his overreaction, 
so do not waste time trying to figure him out. If at any point in your deal¬ 
ings with a person you sense an oversensitive and overactive pride, flee. 
Whatever you are hoping for from him isn’t worth it. 

The Hopelessly Insecure Man. This man is related to the proud and ar¬ 
rogant type, but is less violent and harder to spot. His ego is fragile, his 
sense of self insecure, and if he feels himself deceived or attacked, the hurt 
will simmer. He will attack you in bites that will take forever to get big 
enough for you to notice. If you find you have deceived or harmed such a 
man, disappear for a long time. Do not stay around him or he will nibble 
you to death. 

Mr. Suspicion. Another variant on the breeds above, this is a future Joe 
Stalin. He sees what he wants to see—usually the worst—in other people, 
and imagines that everyone is after him. Mr. Suspicion is in fact the least 
dangerous of the three: Genuinely unbalanced, he is easy to deceive, just as 
Stalin himself was constantly deceived. Play on his suspicious nature to get 
him to turn against other people. But if you do become the target of his sus¬ 
picions, watch out. 

The Serpent with a Long Memory. If hurt or deceived, this man will 
show no anger on the surface; he will calculate and wait. Then, when he is 
in a position to turn the tables, he will exact a revenge marked by a cold¬ 
blooded shrewdness. Recognize this man by his calculation and cunning in 
the different areas of his life. He is usually cold and unaffectionate. Be dou¬ 
bly careful of this snake, and if you have somehow injured him, either 
crush him completely or get him out of your sight. 

The Plain, Unassuming, and Often Unintelligent Man. Ah, your ears 
prick up when you find such a tempting victim. But this man is a lot harder 



to deceive than you imagine. Falling for a ruse often takes intelligence 
and imagination—a sense of the possible rewards. The blunt man will 
not take the bait because he does not recognize it. He is that unaware. The 
danger with this man is not that he will harm you or seek revenge, but 
merely that he will waste your time, energy, resources, and even your san¬ 
ity in trying to deceive him. Have a test ready for a mark—a joke, a story. If 
his reaction is utterly literal, this is the type you are dealing with. Continue 
at your own risk. 


TRANSGRESSIONS OF THE LAW 
Transgression I 

In the early part of the thirteenth century, Muhammad, the shah of 
Khwarezm, managed after many wars to forge a huge empire, extending 
west to present-day Turkey and south to Afghanistan. The empire’s center 
was the great Asian capital of Samarkand. The shah had a powerful, well- 
trained army, and could mobilize 200,000 warriors within days. 

In 1219 Muhammad received an embassy from a new tribal leader to 
the east, Genghis Khan. The embassy included all sorts of gifts to the great 
Muhammad, representing the finest goods from Khan’s small but growing 
Mongol empire. Genghis Khan wanted to reopen the Silk Route to Europe, 
and offered to share it with Muhammad, while promising peace between 
the two empires. 

Muhammad did not know this upstart from the east, who, it seemed to 
him, was extremely arrogant to try to talk as an equal to one so clearly his 
superior. He ignored Khan’s offer. Khan tried again: This time he sent a 
caravan of a hundred camels filled with the rarest articles he had plun¬ 
dered from China. Before the caravan reached Muhammad, however, 
Inalchik, the governor of a region bordering on Samarkand, seized it 
for himself, and executed its leaders. 

Genghis Khan was sure that this was a mistake—that Inalchik had 
acted without Muhammad’s approval. He sent yet another mission to 
Muhammad, reiterating his offer and asking that the governor be punished. 
This time Muhammad himself had one of the ambassadors beheaded, and 
sent the other two back with shaved heads—a horrifying insult in the Mon¬ 
gol code of honor. Khan sent a message to the shah: “You have chosen war. 
What will happen will happen, and what it is to be we know not; only God 
knows.” Mobilizing his forces, in 1220 he attacked Inalchik’s province, 
where he seized the capital, captured the governor, and ordered him exe¬ 
cuted by having molten silver poured into his eyes and ears. 

Over the next year, Khan led a series of guerrilla-like campaigns 
against the shah’s much larger army. His method was totally novel for the 
time—his soldiers could move very fast on horseback, and had mastered 
the art of firing with bow and arrow while mounted. The speed and flexi¬ 
bility of his forces allowed him to deceive Muhammad as to his intentions 
and the directions of his movements. Eventually he managed first to sur- 


prison, and put Aguirre 
on the beast.... The 
beast was driven on, 
and he received the 
lashes ....” 

When freed, Aguirre 
announced his inten¬ 
tion of killing the offi¬ 
cial who had sentenced 
him, the alcalde 
Esquivel. Esquivel's 
term of o ffice expired 
and he fled to Lima, 
three hundred twenty 
leagues away, but 
within fifteen days 
Aguirre had tracked 
him there. The fright¬ 
ened judge journeyed 
to Quito, a trip of four 
hundred leagues, and in 
twenty days Aguirre 
arrived. 

“ When Esquivel heard 
of his presence, ” 
according to Garcilaso, 
“he made ano ther jour¬ 
ney of five hundred 
leagues to Cuzco; but 
in a few days Aguirre 
also arrived, having 
travelled on foot and 
without shoes, saying 
that a whipped man 
has no business to ride 
a horse, or to go where 
he would be seen by 
others. In this way, 
Aguirre followed his 
judge, for three years , 
and four months. ” 
Wearying of the 
pursuit, Esquivel 
remained at Cuzco, a 
city so sternly governed 
(hat he felt he would be 
safe from Aguirre. He 
took a house near the 
cathedral and never 
ventured outdoors 
without a sword and a 
dagger. “However, on a 
certain Monday, at 
noon . Aguirre entered 
his house, and having 
walked all over it, and 
having traversed a 
corridor, a saloon, a 
chamber, and an inner 


LAW 19 


139 



chamber where the 
judge kept his books, 
he at last found him 
asleep over one of his 
books, and stabbed him 
to death. The murderer 
then went out, but 
when he came to the 
door of the house, he 
found that he had 
forgotten his hat, and 
had the temerity to 
return and fetch it, and 
then walked down 
the street/’ 

1HE GOLDEN DREAM.' 
SEEKERS OF EL DORADO, 

Walker Chapman, 
1967 


THE CROV AND 
THK KHKF.P 

A troublesome Crow 
seated herself on the 
back of a Sheep. The 
Sheep, much against his 
will, carried her back¬ 
ward and forward, for a 
long time, and at last 
said, “If you had 
treated a dog in this 
way, you would have 
had your deserts from 
his sharp teeth. ” To this 
the Crow replied, 
despise the weak, and 
yield to the strong. / 
know whom l may 
bully, and whom l must 
flatter; and thus I hope 
to prolong my life to a 
good old age, 

FABLES, 

Aesop. 

SIXTH CENTERY B.C. 


round Samarkand, then to seize it. Muhammad fled, and a year later died, 
his vast empire broken and destroyed. Genghis Khan was sole master of 
Samarkand, the Silk Route, and most of northern Asia. 

Interpretation 

Never assume that, the person you are dealing with is weaker or less impor¬ 
tant than you axe. Some men are slow to take offense, which may make 
you misjudge the thickness of their skin, and fail to worry about insulting 
them. But should you offend their honor and their pride, they will over¬ 
whelm you with a violence that seems sudden and extreme given their 
slowness to anger. If you want to turn people down, it is best to do so po¬ 
litely and respectfully, even if you feel their request is impudent or their 
offer ridiculous. Never reject them with an insult until you know them bet¬ 
ter; you may be dealing with a Genghis Khan. 

Transgression II 

In the late 1910s some of the best swindlers in America formed a con-artist 
ring based in Denver, Colorado. In the winter months they would spread 
across the southern states, plying their trade. In 1920 Joe Furey, a leader of 
the ring, was working his way through Texas, making hundreds of thou¬ 
sands of dollars with classic con games. In Fort Worth, he met a sucker 
named J. Frank Norfleet, a cattleman who owned a large ranch. Norfleet 
fell for the con. Convinced of the riches to come, he emptied his bank ac¬ 
count of $45,000 and handed it over to Furey and his confederates. A few 
days later they gave him his “millions,’ 1 which turned out to be a few good 
dollars wrapped around a packet of newspaper clippings, 

Furey and his men had worked such cons a hundred times before, and 
the sucker was usually so embarrassed by his gullibility that he quietly 
learned his lesson and accepted the loss. But Norfleet was not like other 
suckers. He went to tile police, who told him there was litde they could do. 
“Then I’ll go after those people myself,” Norfleet told the detectives. “I’ll 
get them, too, if it takes the rest of my life.” His wife took over the ranch as 
Norfleet scoured the country, looking for others who had been fleeced in 
the same game. One such sucker came forward, and the two men identified 
one of the con artists in San Francisco, and managed to get him locked up. 
The man committed suicide rather than face a long term in prison. 

Norfleet kept going. He tracked down another of the con artists in 
Montana, roped him like a calf, and dragged him through the muddy streets 
to the town jail. He traveled not only across the country but to England, 
Canada, and Mexico in search of Joe Furey, and also of Furey’s right-hand 
man, W. B. Spencer. Finding Spencer in Montreal, Norfleet chased him 
through the streets. Spencer escaped but the rancher stayed on his brail and 
caught up with him in Salt Lake City, Preferring the mercy of the law to 
Norfleet’s wrath, Spencer turned himself in. 

Norfleet found Furey in Jacksonville, Florida, and personally hauled 
him off to face justice in Texas. But he wouldn’t stop there: He continued 
on to Denver, determined to break up the entire ring. Spending not only 


140 


LAW 5 9 



large sums of money but another year of his life in the pursuit, he managed 
to put all of the con ring’s leaders behind bars. Even some he didn’t catch 
had grown so terrified of him that they too turned themselves in. 

After five years of hunting, Norfleet had single-handedly destroyed the 
country’s largest confederation of con artists. The effort bankrupted him 
and rained his marriage, but he died a satisfied man. 

Interpretation 

Most men accept the humiliation of being conned with a sense of resigna¬ 
tion. They learn their lesson, recognizing that there is no such thing as a 
free lunch, and that they have usually been brought down by their own 
greed for easy money. Some, however, refuse to take their medicine. In¬ 
stead of reflecting on their own gullibility and avarice, they see themselves 
as totally innocent victims. 

Men like this may seem to be crusaders for justice and honesty, but 
they are actually immoderately insecure. Being fooled, being conned, has 
activated their self-doubt, and they are desperate to repair the damage. 
Were the mortgage on Norfleet’s ranch, the collapse of his marriage, and 
the years of borrowing money and living in cheap hotels worth his revenge 
over his embarrassment at being fleeced? To the Norfleets of the world, 
overcoming their embarrassment is worth any price. 

All people have insecurities, and often the best way to deceive a sucker 
is to play upon his insecurities. But in the realm of power, everything is a 
question of degree, and the person who is decidedly more insecure than 
the average mortal presents great dangers. Be warned: If you practice de¬ 
ception or trickery of any sort, study your mark well. Some people’s inse¬ 
curity and ego fragility cannot tolerate the slightest offense. To see if you 
are dealing with such a type, test them first—make, say, a mild joke at their 
expense. A confident person will laugh; an overly insecure one will react as 
if personally insulted. If you suspect you are dealing with this type, find an¬ 
other victim. 

Transgression III 

In the fifth century B.C., Ch’ung-erh, the prince of Ch’in (in present-day 
China), had been forced into exile. He lived modestly—even, sometimes, 
in poverty—-waiting for the time when he could return home and resume 
his princely life. Once he was passing through the state of Cheng, where 
the ruler, not knowing who he was, treated him rudely. The ruler’s minis¬ 
ter, Shu Chan, saw this and said, “This man is a worthy prince. May Your 
Highness treat him with great courtesy and thereby place him under an 
obligation!” But the ruler, able to see only the prince’s lowly station, ig¬ 
nored this advice and insulted the prince again. Shu Chan again warned 
his master, saying, “If Your Highness cannot treat Ch’ung-erh with cour¬ 
tesy, you should put him to death, to avoid calamity in the future.” The 
ruler only scoffed. 

Years later, the prince was finally able to return home, his circum¬ 
stances greatly changed. He did not forget who had been kind to him, and 



who had been insolent, during his years of poverty. Least of all did he for¬ 
get his treatment at the hands of the ruler of Cheng. At his first opportunity 
he assembled a vast army and marched on Cheng, taking eight cities, de¬ 
stroying the kingdom, and sending the ruler into an exile of his own. 
Interpretation 

You can never be sure who you are dealing with. A man who is of little im¬ 
portance and means today can be a person of power tomorrow. We forget 
a lot in our lives, but we rarely forget an insult. 

How was the ruler of Cheng to know that Prince Ch’ung-erh was an 
ambitious, calculating, cunning type, a serpent with a long memory? There 
was really no way for him to know, you may say—but since there was no 
way, it would have been better not to tempt the fates by finding out. There 
is nothing to be gained by insulting a person unnecessarily. Swallow the 
impulse to offend, even if the other' person seems weak. The satisfaction is 
meager compared to the danger that someday he or she will be in a posi¬ 
tion to hurt you. 

Transgression IV 

The year of 1920 had been a particularly bad one for American art dealers. 
Big buyers—the robber-baron generation of the previous century—were 
getting to an age where they were dying off like flies, and no new million¬ 
aires had emerged to take their place. Things were so bad that a number of 
the major dealers decided to pool their resources, an unheard-of event, 
since art dealers usually get along like cats and dogs. 

Joseph Duveen, art dealer to the richest tycoons of America, was suf¬ 
fering more than the others that year, so he decided to go along with this 
alliance. The group now consisted of the five biggest dealers in the country. 
Looking around for a new client, they derided that their last best hope was 
Henry Ford, then the wealthiest man in America. Ford had yet to venture 
into the art market, and he was such a big target that it made sense for them 
to work together. 

The dealers decided to assemble a list, “The 100 Greatest Paintings in 
the World” (all of which they happened to have in stock), and to offer the 
lot of them to Ford. With one purchase he could make himself the world’s 
greatest collector. The consortium worked for weeks to produce a magnifi¬ 
cent object: a three-volume set of books containing beautiful reproductions 
of the paintings, as well as scholarly texts accompanying each picture. Next 
they made a personal visit to Ford at his home in Dearborn, Michigan. 
There they were surprised by the simplicity of his house: Mr. Ford was ob¬ 
viously an extremely unaffected man. 

Ford received them in his study. Looking through the book, he ex¬ 
pressed astonishment and delight. The excited dealers began imagining the 
millions of dollars that would shortly flow into their coffers. Finally, how¬ 
ever, Ford looked up from the book and said, "Gentlemen, beautiful books 
like these, with beautiful colored pictures like these, must cost an awful 
lot!” "But Mr. Ford!” exclaimed Duveen, "we don’t expect you to buy these 



books. We got them up especially for you, to show you the pictures. These 
books are a present to you.” Ford seemed puzzled. “Gentlemen,” he said, 
“it is extremely nice of you, but I really don’t see how I can accept a beau¬ 
tiful, expensive present like this from strangers.” Duveen explained to Ford 
that the reproductions in the books showed paintings they had hoped to 
sell to him. Ford finally understood. “But gentlemen,” he exclaimed, “what 
would I want with the original pictures when the ones right here in these 
books are so beautiful?” 

Interpretation 

Joseph Duveen prided himself on studying his victims and clients in ad¬ 
vance, figuring out their weaknesses and the peculiarities of their tastes be¬ 
fore he ever met them. He was driven by desperation to drop this tactic just 
once, in his assault on Henry Ford. It took him months to recover from his 
misjudgment, both mentally and monetarily. Ford was the unassuming 
plain-man type who just isn’t worth the bother. He was the incarnation of 
those literal-minded folk who do not possess enough imagination to be de¬ 
ceived. From then on, Duveen saved his energies for the Mellons and Mor¬ 
gans of the world—men crafty enough for him to entrap in his snares. 


KEYS TO POWER 

The ability to measure people and to know who you’re dealing with is the 
most important skill of all in gathering and conserving power. Without it 
you are blind: Not only will you offend the wrong people, you will choose 
the wrong types to work on, and will think you are flattering people when 
you are actually insulting them. Before embarking on any move, take the 
measure of your mark or potential opponent. Otherwise you will waste 
time and make mistakes. Study people’s weaknesses, the chinks in their 
armor, their areas of both pride and insecurity. Know their ins and outs be¬ 
fore you even decide whether or not to deal with them. 

Two final words of caution: First, in judging and measuring your oppo¬ 
nent, never rely on your instincts. You will make the greatest mistakes of all 
if you rely on such inexact indicators. Nothing can substitute for gathering 
concrete knowledge. Study and spy on your opponent for however long it 
takes; this will pay off in the long run. 

Second, never trust appearances. Anyone with a serpent’s heart can 
use a show of kindness to cloak it; a person who is blustery on the outside is 
often really a coward. Learn to see through appearances and their contra¬ 
dictions. Never trust the version that people give of themselves—it is ut¬ 
terly unreliable. 




Image: The Hunter. He does not lay the 
same trap for a wolf as for a fox. He does 
not set bait where no one will take it. 
He knows his prey thoroughly, its habits 
and hideaways, and hunts accordingly. 


Authority: Be convinced, that there axe no 
persons so insignificant and inconsiderable, 
but may, some time or other, have it in their 
power to be of use to you; which they cer¬ 
tainly will not, if you have once shown them 
contempt. Wrongs are often forgiven, but 
contempt never is. Our pride remembers 
it for ever. (1x3rd Chesterfield, 1694-1773} 


REVERSAL 

What possible good can come from ignorance about other people? Learn 
to tell the lions from the lambs or pay the price. Obey this law to its fullest 
extent; it has no reversal—do not bother looking for one. 



LAW 


20 

DO NOT COMMIT 
TO ANYONE 

JUDGMENT 

It is the fool who always rushes to take sides . Do not com¬ 
mit to any side or cause but yourself By maintaining 
your independence , you become the master of others — 
playing people against one another, making them 
pursue you. 


145 



PART I: DO NOT COMMIT TO ANYONE, 

BUT BE COURTED BY ALL 

If you allow people to feel they possess you to any degree, you lose all power 
over them. By not committing your affections, they will only try harder to 
win you over Stay aloof and you gain the power that comes from their at¬ 
tention and frustrated desire . Play the Virgin (hieen: Give them hope hut 
never satisfaction. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

When Queen Elizabeth I ascended the throne of England, in 1558, there 
was much to-do about her finding a husband. The issue was debated in Par¬ 
liament, and was a main topic of conversation among Englishmen of all 
classes; they often disagreed as to whom she should marry, but everyone 
thought she should marry as soon as possible, for a queen must have a 
king, and must bear heirs for the kingdom. The debates raged on for years. 
Meanwhile the most handsome and eligible bachelors in the realm—Sir 
Robert Dudley, the Earl of Essex, Sir Walter Raleigh—vied for Elizabeth’s 
hand. She did not discourage them, but she seemed to be in no hurry, and 
her hints as to which man might be her favorite often contradicted each 
other. In 1566, Parliament sent a delegation to Elizabeth urging her to 
marry before she was too old to bear children. She did not argue, nor did 
she discourage the delegation, but she remained a virgin nonetheless. 

The delicate game that Elizabeth played with her suitors slowly made 
her the subject of innumerable sexual fantasies and the object of cultish 
worship. The court physician, Simon Forman, used his diary to describe 
his dreams of deflowering her. Painters represented her as Diana and other 
goddesses. The poet Edmund Spenser a^d others wrote eulogies to the Vir¬ 
gin Queen. She w T as referred to as “the world’s Empresse,” “that virtuous 
Virgo” who rules the world and sets the stars in motion. In conversation 
with her, her many male suitors would employ bold sexual innuendo, a 
dare that Elizabeth did not discourage. She did all she could to stir their in¬ 
terest and simultaneously keep them at bay. 

Throughout Europe, kings and princes knew that a marriage with Eliz¬ 
abeth would seal an alliance between England and any nation. The king of 
Spain wooed her, as did the prince of Sweden and the archduke of Austria. 
She politely refused them all. 

The great diplomatic issue of Elizabeth’s day was posed by the revolt 
of the Flemish and Dutch Lowlands, which were then possessions of Spain. 
Should England break its alliance with Spain and choose France as its main 
ally on the Continent, thereby encouraging Flemish and Dutch indepen¬ 
dence? By 1570 it had come to seem that an alliance with France would be 
England’s wisest course. France had two eligible men of noble blood, the 
dukes of Anjou and Alen^on, brothers of the French king. Would either of 
them marry Elizabeth? Both had advantages, and Elizabeth kept the hopes 
of both alive. The issue simmered for years. The duke of Anjou made sev- 



eral visits to England, kissed Elizabeth in public, even called her by pet 
names; she appeared to requite his affections. Meanwhile, as she flirted 
with the two brothers, a treaty was signed that sealed peace between 
France and England. By 1582 Elizabeth felt she could break off the 
courtship. In the case of the duke of Anjou in particular, she did so with 
great relief: For the sake of diplomacy she had allowed herself to be 
courted by a man whose presence she could not stand and whom she 
found physically repulsive. Once peace between France and England was 
secure, she dropped the unctuous duke as politely as she could. 

By this time Elizabeth was too old to bear children. She was accord¬ 
ingly able to live the rest of her life as she desired, and she died the Virgin 
Queen. She left no direct heir, but ruled through a period of incomparable 
peace and cultural fertility. 

Interpretation 

Elizabeth had good reason not to marry: She had witnessed the mistakes of 
Mary Queen of Scots, her cousin. Resisting the idea of being ruled by a 
woman, the Scots expected Mary to marry and many' wisely. To wed a for¬ 
eigner would be unpopular; to favor any particular noble house would 
open up terrible rivalries. In the end Mary chose Lord Damley, a Catholic. 
In doing so she incurred the wrath of Scotland’s Protestants, and endless 
turmoil ensued. 

Elizabeth knew that marriage can often lead to a female ruler’s undo¬ 
ing: By marrying and committing to an alliance with one party or nation, 
the queen becomes embroiled in conflicts that are not of her choosing, con¬ 
flicts which may eventually overwhelm her or lead her into a futile war. 
Also, the husband becomes the de facto ruler, and often tries to do away 
with his wife the queen, as Damley tried to get rid of Mary. Elizabeth 
learned the lesson well. She had two goals as a ruler: to a oid marriage and 
to avoid war. She managed to combine these goals by wangling the possi¬ 
bility of marriage in order to forge alliances. The moment she committed 
to any single suitor would have been the moment she lost her power. She 
had to emanate mystery and desirability, never discouraging anyone’s 
hopes but never yielding. 

Through this lifelong game of flirting and withdrawing, Elizabeth 
dominated the country and every man who sought to conquer her. As the 
center of attention, she was in control. Keeping her independence above 
all, Elizabeth protected her power and made herself an object of worship. 

/ would rather be a beggar and single than a queen and married . 

Queen Elizabeth 1, 1533-1603 


KEYS TO POWER 

Since power depends greatly on appearances, you must leam the tricks 
that will enhance your image. Refusing to commit to a person or group is 
one of these. When you hold yourself back, you incur not anger but a kind 



of respect. You instantly seem powerful because you make yourself un- 
graspable, rather than succumbing to the group, or to the relationship, as 
most people do. This aura of power only grows with time: As your reputa¬ 
tion for independence grows, more and more people will come to desire 
you, wanting to be the one who gets you to commit. Desire is like a vims: If 
we see that someone is desired by other people, we tend to find this person 
desirable too. 

The moment you commit, the magic is gone. You become like every¬ 
one else. People will try all kinds of underhanded methods to get you to 
commit. They will give you gifts, shower you with favors, all to put you 
under obligation. Encourage the attention, stimulate their interest, but do 
not commit at any cost. Accept the gifts and favors if you so desire, but be 
careful to maintain your inner aloofness. You cannot inadvertently allow 
yourself to feel obligated to anyone. 

Remember, though: The goal is not to put people off, or to make it seem 
that you are incapable of commitment Like the Virgin Queen, you need to 
stir the pot, excite interest, lure people with the possibility of having you. 
You have to bend to their attention occasionally, then—but never too far. 

The Greek soldier and statesman Alcibiades played this game to per¬ 
fection. It was Alcibiades who inspired and led the massive Athenian ar¬ 
mada that invaded Sicily in 414 B.C. When envious Athenians back home 
tried to bring him down by accusing him of trumped-up charges, he de¬ 
fected to the enemy, the Spartans, instead of facing a trial back home. Then, 
after the Athenians were defeated at Syracuse, he left Sparta for Persia, even 
though the power of Sparta was now on the rise. Now, however, both the 
Athenians and the Spartans courted Alcibiades because of his influence 
with the Persians; and the Per' tans showered him with honors because of 
his power over the Athenians and the Spartans. He made promises to every 
side but committed to none, and in the end he held all the cards. 

If you aspire to power and influence, try the Alcibiades tactic: Put 
yourself in the middle between competing powers. Lure one side with the 
promise of your help; the other side, always wanting to outdo its enemy, 
will pursue you as well. As each side vies for your attention, you will im¬ 
mediately seem a person of great influence and desirability. More power 
will accrue to you than if you had rashly committed to one side, lo perfect 
this tactic you need to keep yourself inwardly free from emotional entan¬ 
glements, and to view all those around you as pawns in your rise to the top. 
You cannot let yourself become the lackey for any cause. 

In the midst of the 1968 U.S. presidential election, Henry Kissinger 
made a phone call to Richard Nixon’s team. Kissinger had been allied with 
Nelson Rockefeller, who had unsuccessfully sought the Republican nomina¬ 
tion. Now Kissinger offered to supply the Nixon camp with valuable inside 
information on the negotiations for peace in Vietnam that were then going 
on in Paris. He had a man on the negotiating team keeping him informed of 
the latest developments. The Nixon team gladly accepted his offer. 

At the same time, however, Kissinger also approached the Democratic 
nominee, Hubert Humphrey, and offered his aid. The Humphrey people 



asked him for inside information on Nixon and he supplied it. “Look,” 
Kissinger told Humphrey’s people, w IVe hated Nixon for years.” In fact he 
had no interest in either side. What he really wanted was what he got: the 
promise of a high-level cabinet post from both Nixon and Humphrey. 
Whichever man won the election, Kissinger’s career was secure. 

The winner, of course, was Nixon, and Kissinger duly went on to his 
cabinet post. Even so, he was careful never to appear too much of a Nixon 
man. When Nixon was reelected in 1972, men much more loyal to him 
than Kissinger were fired. Kissinger was also the only Nixon high official to 
survive Watergate and serve under the next president, Gerald Ford. By 
maintaining a little distance he thrived in turbulent times. 

Those who use this strategy often notice a strange phenomenon: 
People who rush to the support of others tend to gain little respect in the 
process, for their help is so easily obtained, while those who stand back 
find themselves besieged with supplicants. Their aloofness is powerful, and 
everyone wants them on their side. 

When Picasso, after early years of poverty, had become the most suc¬ 
cessful artist in the world, he did not commit himself to this dealer or that 
dealer, although they now besieged him from all sides with attractive offers 
and grand promises. Instead, he appeared to have no interest in their ser¬ 
vices; this technique drove them wild, and as they fought over him his 
prices only rose. When Henry Kissinger, as U.S. secretary of state, wanted 
to reach detente with the Soviet Union, he made no concessions or concil¬ 
iatory gestures, but courted China instead. This infuriated and also scared 
the Soviets—they were already politicafiy isolated and feared further isola¬ 
tion if the United States and China .came together. Kissinger’s move 
pushed them to the negotiating table. The tactic has a parallel in seduction: 
When you want to seduce a woman, Stendhal advises, court her sister first. 

Stay aloof and people will come to you. It will become a challenge for 
them to win your affections. As long as you imitate the wise Virgin Queen 
and stimulate their hopes, you will remain a magnet of attention and desire. 


Image: 

The Virgin Queen. 

The center of attention, 
desire, and worship. Never 
succumbing to one suitor or the 
other, the Virgin Queen keeps 
them all revolving around 
her like planets, unable to 
leave her orbit but never 
getting any closer 
to her. 


Authority': Do not commit 
yourself to anybody or any¬ 
thing, for that is to be a slave, a 
slave to every man. . . . Above 
all, keep yourself free of com¬ 
mitments and obligations— 
they are the device of anoth er 
to get you into his power. . . . 
(Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658) 



PART II: DO NOT COMMIT TO ANYONE- 
STAY ABOVE THE FRAY 

Do not let people drag you into their petty fights and squabbles . Seem inter¬ 
ested and supportive, but find a way to remain neutrallet others do the 
fighting while you stand back, watch and wait. When the fighting parties 
are good and tired they will be ripe for the picking You can make it a prac¬ 
tice, in fact, to stir up quarrels between other people, and then offer to medi¬ 
ate, gaining power as the go-between. 


ini: kiit-;s. Tim* 

CMOS'S, AM) THi: » 

The kites and the crows 
made an agreement 
among themselves that 
they should go halves 
in everything obtained 
in the forest. One day 
they saw a fox that hud 
been wounded by 
hunters lying helpless 
under a tree, and gath - 
ered round it. 
The. crows said. ' We 
will take the upper half 
of the fox." '" Then we 
will take the lower 
ha Iff'said the kites. 
The fox laughed at this, 
and said, *7 always 
thought the kites were 
superior in creation to 
the crows; as such they 
must get the upper half 
of my body, of which 
my head, with the brain 
and other delicate 
things m it, farms a 
portion. ” 
"Oh, vi’-S that is right ," 
said the kites, “we will 
have that part of ihtt 
fox ." "Not at all," said 
the crows, “we must 
have it, as already 
agreed. ” Then a war 
arose between the rival 
parties, and a great 
many fell on both sides, 
and the remaining few 
escaped with difficulty. 
The fox continued 
there for some days, 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

In the late fifteenth century, the strongest city-states in Italy—Venice, Flo¬ 
rence, Rome, and Milan—found themselves constantly squabbling- Hover¬ 
ing above their struggles were the nations of France and Spain, ready to 
grab whatever they could from the weakened Italian powers. And trapped 
in the middle was the small state of Mantua, ruled by the young Duke 
Gianfrancesco Gonzaga. Mantua was strategically located in northern 
Italy, and it seemed only a matter of time before one of the powers swal¬ 
lowed it up and it ceased to exist as an independent kingdom. 

Gonzaga was a fierce warrior and a skilled commander of troops, and 
he became a kind of mercenary general for whatever side paid him best. In 
the year 1490, he married Isabella d’Este, daughter of the ruler of another 
small Italian duchy, Ferrara. Since he now spent most of his time away 
fron Mantua, it fell to Isabella to rule in his stead. 

Isabella’s first true test as ruler came in 1498, when King Louis XII of 
France was preparing armies to attack Milan. In their usual perfidious fash¬ 
ion, the Italian states immediately looked for ways to profit from Milan’s 
difficulties. Pope Alexander VI promised not to intervene, thereby giving 
the French carte blanche. The Venetians signaled that they would not help 
Milan, either—and in exchange for this, they hoped the French would gi ve 
them Mantua. The ruler of Milan, Lodovico Sforza, suddenly found him¬ 
self alone and abandoned. He turned to Isabella d’Este, one of his closest 
friends (also rumored to be his lover), and begged her to persuade Duke 
Gonzaga to come to his aid. Isabella tried, but her husband balked, for he 
saw Sforza’s cause as hopeless. And so, in 1499, Louis swooped down on 
Milan and took it with ease. 

Isabella now faced a dilemma: If she stayed loyal to Lodovico, the 
French would now move against her. But if, instead, she allied herself with 
France, she would make enemies elsewhere in Italy, compromising Man¬ 
tua once Louis eventually withdrew. And if she looked to Venice or Rome 
for help, they would simply swallow up Mantua under the cloak of coming 
to her aid. Yet she had to do something. The mighty king of France was 
breathing down her neck: She decided to befriend him, as she had be¬ 
friended Lodovico Sforza before him—with alluring gifts, witty, intelligent 
letters, and the possibility of her company, for Isabella was famous as a 
woman of incomparable beauty and charm. 


150 ! LAW 20 



In 1500 Louis invited Isabella to a great party in Milan to celebrate his 
victory. Leonardo da Vinci built an enormous mechanical lion for the af¬ 
fair: When the lion opened its mouth, it spewed fresh lilies, the symbols of 
French royalty. At the party Isabella wore one of her celebrated dresses 
(she had by far the largest wardrobe of any of the Italian princesses), and 
just as she had hoped, she charmed and captivated Louis, who ignored all 
the other ladies vying for his attention. She soon became his constant com¬ 
panion, and in exchange for her friendship he pledged to protect Mantua’s 
independence from Venice. 

As one danger receded, however, another, more worrying one arose, 
this time from the south, in the form of Cesare Borgia. Starting in 1500, 
Borgia had marched steadily northward, gobbling up all the small king¬ 
doms in his path in the name of his father, Pope Alexander. Isabella under¬ 
stood Cesare perfectly: He could be neither trusted nor in any way 
offended. He had to be cajoled and kept at arm’s length. Isabella began by 
sending him gifts—falcons, prize dogs, perfumes, and dozens of masks, 
which she knew he always wore when he walked the streets of Rome. She 
sent messengers with flattering greetings (although these messengers also 
acted as her spies). At one point Cesare asked if he could house some 
troops in Mantua; Isabella managed to dissuade him politely, knowing full 
well that once the troops were quartered in the city, they would never 
leave. 

Even while Isabella was charming Cesare, she convinced everyone 
around her to take care never to utter a harsh word about him, since he 
had spies everywhere and would use the slightest pretext for invasion. 
When Isabella had a child, she asked Cesare to be the godfather. She even 
dangled in front of him the possibility of a marriage between her family 
and his. Somehow it all worked, for although elsewhere he seized every¬ 
thing in his path, he spared Mantua. 

In 1503 Cesare’s father, Alexander, died, and a few years later the new 
pope, Julius II, went to war to drive the French troops from Italy. When 
the ruler of Ferrara—Alfonso, Isabella’s brother—sided with the French, 
Julius decided to attack and humble him. Once again Isabella found herself 
in the middle: the pope on one side, the French and her brother on the 
other. She dared not ally herself with either, but to offend either would be 
equally disastrous. Again she played the double game at which she had be¬ 
come so expert. On the one hand she got her husband Gonzaga to fight for 
the pope, knowing he would not fight very hard. On the other she let 
French troops pass through Mantua to come to Ferrara’s aid. While she 
publicly complained that the French had “invaded” her territory, she pri¬ 
vately supplied them with valuable information. To make the invasion 
plausible to Julius, she even had the French pretend to plunder Mantua. It 
worked once again: The pope left Mantua alone. 

In 1513, after a lengthy siege, Julius defeated Ferrara, and the French 
troops withdrew. Worn out by the effort, the pope died a few months later. 
With his death, the nightmarish cycle of battles and petty squabbles began 
to repeat itself. 


leisurely feeding on the 
dead kites and crows, 
and then left the place 
hale and hearty, 
observing, “The weak 
benefit by the quarrels 
of the mighty.” 

INDIAN FABLES 


Men of great abilities 
are slow to act, for it is 
easier to avoid occa¬ 
sions for committing 
yourself than to come 
well out of a commit¬ 
ment. Such occasions 
test your judgment; it is 
safer to avoid them 
than to emerge victori¬ 
ous from them. One 
obligation leads to a 
greater one, and you 
come very near to the 
brink of disaster. 

B A LTASA R GR AC I. AN, 
1601-1658 


LAW 20 


151 



THE EACLE AN» THK SOW 

An eagle built a nest on 
a tree, and hatched out 
some eaglets . And a 
wild sow brought her 
Utter under the tree, 
The eagle used to fly 
off after her prey, and 
bring it back to her 
young. And the sow 
rooted around the tree 
and hunted in the 
woods, and when night 
came she would bring 
her young something 
to eat. 

And the eagle and the 
sow lived in neighborly 
fashion. And a 
grimalkin laid her 
plans to destroy the 
eaglets and the little 
sucking pigs. She went 
to the. eagle, and said: 
"Eagle, you had better 
not fly very far away. 
Beware of the sow; she 
is planning an evil 
design. She is going to 
undermine the roots of 
the tree. You see she is 
rooting all the time/' 
Then the grimalkin 
went to the sow and 
said: "Sow, you have 
not a good neighbor. 
Last evening / heard 
the eagle saying to her 
eaglets: 'My dear little 
eaglets, 1 am going to 
ireat you to a nice link 
pig. Just as soon as the 
sow is gone, f wilt bring 
you a little young 
sucking pig .' ” 
From that time the 
eagle ceased to fly out 
after prey, and the sow 
did not go any more 
into the forest. The 
eaglets and the young 
pigs perished of starva¬ 
tion, and grimalkin 
feasted an them. 

FABI.E-S, 

Loo Tolstoy. 

1828-1910 

152 LAW 20 


A great deal changed in Italy during Isabella’s reign: Popes came and 
went, Cesare Borgia rose and then fell, Venice lost its empire, Milan was in¬ 
vaded, Florence fell into decline, and Rome was sacked by the Hapsburg 
Emperor Charles V. Through all this, tiny Mantua not only survived but 
thrived, its court the envy of Italy, Its wealth and sovereignty would remain 
intact for a century after Isabella’s death, in 1539. 

Interpretation 

Isabella d’Este understood Italy’s political situation with amazing clarity: 
Once you took the side of any of the forces in the field, you were doomed. 
The powerful would take you over, the weak would wear you down. Any 
new alliance would lead to a new enemy, and as this cycle stirred up more 
conflict, other forces would be dragged in, until you could no longer extri¬ 
cate yourself. Eventually you would collapse from exhaustion. 

Isabella steered her kingdom on the only course that would bring her 
safely through. She would not allow herself to lose her head through loy¬ 
alty to a duke or a king. Nor would she try to stop the conflict that raged 
around her—that would only drag her into it. And in any case the conflict 
was to her advantage. If the various parties were fighting to the death, and 
exhausting themselves in the process, they were in no position to gobble 
up Mantua. The source of Isabella’s power was her clever ability to seem 
interested in the affairs and interests of each side, while actually commit¬ 
ting to no one but herself and her kingdom. 

Once you step into a fight that is not of your own choosing, you lose all 
initiative. The combatants’ interests become your interests; you become 
their tool. Learn to control yourself, to restrain your natural tendency to 
take sides and join the fight Be friendly and charming to each of the com¬ 
batants, then step back as they collide. With every battle they grow weaker, 
while you grow stronger with every battle you avoid. 

When the snipe and the mussel struggle, the fisherman gets the benefit . 

Ancient Chinese saying 


KEYS TO POWER 

To succeed in the game of power, you have to master your emotions. But 
even if you succeed in gaining such self-control, you can never control the 
temperamental dispositions of those around you. And this presents a great 
danger. Most people operate in a whirlpool of emotions, constantly react¬ 
ing, churning up squabbles and conflicts. Your self-control and autonomy 
will only bother and infuriate them. They will try to draw you into the 
whirlpool, begging you to take sides in their endless battles, or to make 
peace for them. If you succumb to their emotional entreaties, little by little 
you will find your mind and time occupied by their problems. Do not allow 
whatever compassion and pity you possess to suck you in. You can never 
win in this game; the conflicts can only multiply. 

On the other hand, you cannot completely stand aside, for that would 



cause needless offense. To play the game properly, you must seem inter¬ 
ested in other people’s problems, even sometimes appear to take their side. 
But while you make outw ard gestures of support, you must maintain your 
inner energy and sanity by keeping your emotions disengaged. No matter 
how hard people try to pull you in, never let your interest in their affairs 
and petty squabbles go beyond the surface. Give them gifts, listen with a 
sympathetic look, even occasionally play the charmer—but inwardly keep 
both die ftiendly kings and the perfidious Borgias at arm’s length. By refus¬ 
ing to commit and thus maintaining your autonomy you retain the initia¬ 
tive: Your moves stay matters of your own choosing, not defensive 
reactions to the push-and-pull of those around you. 

Slowness to pick up your weapons can be a weapon itself, especially if 
you let other people exhaust themselves fighting, then take advantage of 
their exhaustion. In ancient China, the kingdom of Chin once invaded the 
kingdom of Hsing. Huan, the ruler of a nearby province, thought he 
should rush to Hsing’s defense, but his adviser counseled him to wait: 
“Hsing is not yet going to ruin,” he said, “and Chin is not yet exhausted. If 
Chin is not exhausted, [we] cannot become very influential. Moreover, the 
merit of supporting a state in danger is not as great as the virtue of reviving 
a ruined one.” The adviser’s argument won the day, and as he had pre¬ 
dicted, Huan later had the glory both of rescuing Hsing from the brink of 
destruction and then of conquering an exhausted Chin. He stayed out of 
the fighting until the forces engaged in it had worn each other down, at 
which point it was safe for him to intervene. 

That is what holding back from the fr ay allows you: time to position 
yourself to take advantage of the situation once one side starts to lose. You 
can also take the game a step further, by promising your support to both 
rides in a conflict while maneuvering so that the one to come out ahead in 
the struggle is you. This was what Castruccio Castracani, ruler of the Italian 
town of Lucca in the fourteenth century, did when he had designs on the 
town of Pistoia. A siege would have been expensive, costing both lives and 
money, but Castruccio knew that Pistoia contained two rival factions, the 
Blacks and the Whites, which hated one another. He negotiated with the 
Blacks, promising to help them against the Whites; then, without their 
knowledge, he promised the Whites he would help them against the 
Blacks. And Castruccio kept his promises—he sent an army to a Black- 
controlled gate to the city, which the sentries of course welcomed in. 
Meanwhile another of his armies entered through a White-controlled gate. 
The two armies united in the middle, occupied the town, killed the leaders 
of both factions, ended the internal war, and took Pistoia for Castruccio. 

Preserving your autonomy gives you options when people come to 
blows—you can play the mediator, broker the peace, while really securing 
your own interests. You can pledge support to one side and the other may 
have to court you with a higher bid. Or, like Castruccio, you can appear to 
take both sides, then play the antagonists against each other. 

Oftentimes when a conflict breaks out, you are tempted to side with 
the stronger party, or the one that offers you apparent advantages in an al 


f HE PRICE OF ENVY 

While a poor woman 
stood in the market¬ 
place selling cheeses, a 
cat came along and 
carried off a cheese. A 
dog saw the pilferer 
and tried to take the 
cheese away from him . 
The cat stood up to the 
dog. So they pitched 
into each other. The 
dog harked and 
snapped; the cat spat 
and scratched, but they 
could bring the battle 
to no decision. 

‘ Let's go to the fox and 
have him referee the 
matter,” the cat. finally 
suggested. 

‘'Agreed,”said the dog. 
So they went to the fox. 
The fox listened to their 
arguments with a judi¬ 
cious air. 

“Foolish animals, ” he 
chided them, “why 
carry on like that? If 
both of you are willing, 
I’ll divide the cheese in 
two and you’ll both be 
satisfied 

”Agreed, ” said the cat 
and the dog. 

So the fox took out his 
knife and cut the cheese 
in two, but, instead of 
cutting it lengthwise, he 
cut it in the width. 

“My half is smaller!” 
protested the dog. 

The fox looked judi¬ 
ciously through his 
spectacles at the dog’s 
share, 

“ You’re right, quite 
right!” he decided. 

So he went and bit off 
a piece of the cat’s 
share. 

“ That will make it 
even!” he said. 

When the cat saw what 
the fox did she began 
to yowl: 


LAW 20 153 



"Just look! My part’s 
smaller now! " 
The fox again put on 
his spectacles and 
looked judiciously at 
the cat’s share. 
“Right you are!"said 
the fox. “Just a 
moment, and I’ll make 
it right, ” 
And he went and hit 
off a piece from the 
dog's cheese 
This went on so long, 
with the fox nibbling 
first at the dog's and 
then at the cars share, 
that he finally ate up 
the whole cheese before 
their eyes. 

A TREASURY OH JFWkSH 
FOLKLORE, 

Nathan Aosubbl, ed., 
1948 


fiance. This is risky business. First, it is often difficult to foresee which side 
will prevail in the long run. But even if you guess right and ally yourself 
with the stronger party, you may find yourself swallowed up and lost, or 
conveniently forgotten, when they become victors. Side with the weaker, 
on the other hand, and you are doomed. But play a waiting game and you 
cannot lose. 

In France’s July Revolution of 1830, after three days of riots, the states¬ 
man Talleyrand, now elderly, sat by his Paris window, listening to the peal¬ 
ing bells that signaled the riots were over. Turning to an assistant, he said, 
“Ah, the bells! We’re winning.” “Who’s ‘we,’ mon princeV' the assistant 
asked. Gesturing for the man to keep quiet, Talleyrand replied, “Not a 
word! Fli tell you who we are tomorrow.” He well knew that only fools 
rush into a situation—that by committing too quickly you lose your ma¬ 
neuverability. People also respect you less: Perhaps tomorrow, they think, 
you will commit to another, different cause, since you gave yourself so eas¬ 
ily to this one. Good fortune is a fickle god and will often pass from one 
side to the other. Commitment to one side deprives you of the advantage of 
time and the luxury of waiting. Let others fall in love with this group or 
that; for your part don’t rush in, don’t lose your head. 

Finally, there are occasions when it is wisest to drop all pretence of ap¬ 
pearing supportive and instead to trumpet your independence and self- 
reliance. The aristocratic pose of independence is particularly important 
for those who need to gain respect. George Washington recognized this in 
his work to establish the young American republic on firm ground. As 
president, Washington avoided the temptation of making an alliance with 
France or England, despite the pressure on him to do so. He wanted the 
country to earn the world’s respect through its independence. Although a 
treaty with France might have helped in the short term, in the long run he 
knew it would be more effective to establish the nation’s autonomy. Eu¬ 
rope would have to see the United States as an equal power. 

Remember: You have only so much energy and so much time. Every 
moment wasted on the affairs of others subtracts from your strength. You 
may be afraid that people will condemn you as heartless, but in the end, 
maintaining your independence and self-reliance will gain you more re¬ 
spect and place you in a position of power from which you can choose to 
help others on your own initiative. 


154 ■ LAW 20 



Image: A Thicket of Shrubs, 
In the forest, one shrub 
latches on to another, 
entangling its neighbor 
with its thorns, the thicket 
slowly extending its impen¬ 
etrable domain. Only what 
keeps its distance and 
stands apart can grow and 
rise above the thicket. 


Authority: Regard it as 
more courageous not to 
become involved in an 
engagement than to win 
in battle, and where there 
is already one interfering 
fool, take care that there 
shall not be two. {Baltasar 
Gracian, 1601-1658) 


REVERSAL 

Both parts of this law will turn against you if you take it too far. The game 
proposed here is delicate and difficult. If you play too many parties against 
one another, they will see through the maneuver and will gang up on you. 
If you keep your growing number of suitors waiting too long, you will in¬ 
spire not desire but distrust. People will start to lose interest. Eventually 
you may find it worthwhile to commit, to one side-—if only for appearances’ 
sake, to prove you are capable of attachment. 

Even then, however, the key will be to maintain your inner indepen¬ 
dence—to keep yourself from getting emotionally involved. Preserve the 
unspoken option of being able to leave at any moment and reclaim your 
freedom if the side you are allied with starts to collapse, The friends you 
made while you were being courted will give you plenty of places to go 
once you jump ship. 



LAW 



PLAY A SUCKER TO CATCH 
A SUCKER—SEEM DUMBER 
THAN YOUR MARK 


JUDGMENT 

No one likes feeUng stupider than the next person. The 
trick , then, is to make your victims feel smart-—and not 
just smart, hut smarter than you are. Once convinced of 
this, they will never suspect that you may have ulterior 
motives . 



OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

In the winter of 1872, the U.S. financier Asbury Harpending was visiting 
London when he received a cable: A diamond mine had been discovered 
in the American West. The cable came from a reliable source—-William 
Ralston, owner of the Bank of California—but Harpending nevertheless 
took it as a practical joke, probably inspired by the recent discovery of 
huge diamond mines in South Africa. True, when reports had first come in 
of gold being discovered in the western United States, everyone had been 
skeptical, and those had turned out to be true. But a diamond mine in the 
West! Harpending showed the cable to his fellow financier Baron Roth* 
schild (one of the richest men in the world), saying it must be a joke. The 
baron, however, replied, “Don’t be too sure about that. America is a very 
large country. It has furnished the world with many surprises already. Per- 
haps it has others in store.” Harpending promptly took the first ship back 
to the States. 

When Harpending reached San Francisco, there was an excitement in 
the air recalling the Gold Rush days of the late 1840s. Two crusty prospec¬ 
tors named Philip Arnold and John Slack had been the ones to find the di¬ 
amond mine. They had not divulged its location, in Wyoming, but had led 
a highly respected mining expert to it several weeks back, taking a circular 
route so he could not guess his whereabouts. Once there, the expert had 
watched as the miners dug up diamonds. Back in San Francisco the expert 
had taken the gems to various jewelers, one of whom had estimated their 
worth at $1.5 million. 

Harpendmg and Ralston now asked Arnold and Slack to accompany 
diem back to New York, where the jeweler Charles Tiffany would verify 
the original estimates. The prospectors responded uneasily—they smelled 
a trap: How could they trust these city slickers? What if Tiffany and the fi¬ 
nanciers managed to steal the whole mine out from under them? Ralston 
tried to allay their fears by giving them $100,000 and placing another 
$300,000 in escrow for them. If the deal went through, they would be paid 
an additional $300,000. The miners agreed. 

The little group traveled to New York, where a meeting was held at the 
mansion of Samuel L. Barlow. The cream of the city’s aristocracy was in at¬ 
tendance—General George Brinton McClellan, commander of the Union 
forces in the Civil War; General Benjamin Butler; Horace Greeley, editor 
of the newspaper the New York Tribune; Harpending; Ralston; and Tiffany. 
Only Slack and Arnold were missing—as tourists in the city, they had de¬ 
cided to go sight-seeing. 

When Tiffany announced that the gems were real and worth a fortune, 
the financiers could barely control their excitement. They wired Roth¬ 
schild and other tycoons to tell them about the diamond mine and inviting 
them to share in the investment. At the same time, they also told the 
prospectors that they wanted one more test: They insisted that a mining ex¬ 
pert of their choosing accompany Slack and Arnold to the site to verify its 
wealth. The prospectors reluctantly agreed. In the meantime, they said, 


Now, there is nothing 
of which a man is 
prouder than of intel¬ 
lectual ability, for it is 
this that gives him his 
commanding place in 
the, animal world. It is 
an exceedingly rash 
thing to let anyone see 
that you are decidedly 
superior to him in (his 
respect, and to let other 
people see it too .... 
Hence , while rank and 
riches may always 
reckon upon deferen¬ 
tial treatment in society, 
that is something which 
intellectual ability can 
never expect; To be 
ignored is the greatest 
favour shown to it; and 
if people notice it at all, 
it is because they 
regard it as a piece of 
impertinence, or else as 
something to which its 
possessor has no legiti¬ 
mate right, and upon 
which he dares to pride 
himself; and in retalia¬ 
tion and revenge for 
his conduct, people 
secretly try and humili¬ 
ate him in some other 
way; and if they wait to 
do this, it is only for a 
fitting opportunity. A 
man may be as humble 
as possible in his 
demeanour, and yet 
hardly ever gel people 
to overlook his crime 
hi standing intellectu¬ 
ally above them. In the 
Garden of Roses, Sadi 
makes the remark: 
‘'You should know that 
foolish people are a 
hundredfold more 
averse to meeting the 
wise than the wise 
are indisposed for 
the company of 
the foolish.. ” 


LAW 21 ! 1ST 




On the other hand, it is 
a real recommendation 
to be stupid. For just as 
warmth is agreeable to 
the body, so it does the 
mind good to feel its 
superiority; and a man 
will seek company 
likely to give him thus 
feeling , as instinctively 
as he will approach the 
fireplace or wa Ik in ihe 
sun if he wants to get 
warm. But this means 
that he will be disliked 
on account of his supe¬ 
riority; and if a man is 
to be liked, he must 
really be inferior in 
point of intellect. 

Arthur 

SfHOPKNHAUKR, 

1788-1860 


they had to return to San Francisco. The jewels that Tiffany had examined 
they left with Harpending for safekeeping. 

Several weeks later, a man named Louis Janin, the best mining expert 
in the country, met the prospectors in San Francisco. Janin was a bom 
skeptic who was determined to make sure that the mine was not a fraud. 
Accompanying Janin were Harpending, and several other interested fi¬ 
nanciers. As with the previous expert, the prospectors led the team through 
a complex series of canyons, completely confusing them as to their where¬ 
abouts. Arriving at the site, the financiers watched in amazement as Janin 
dug the area up, leveling anthills, turning over boulders, and finding emer¬ 
alds, rubies, sapphires, and most of all diamonds. The dig lasted eight days, 
and by the end, Janin was convinced: He told the investors that they now 
possessed the richest field in mining history. “With a hundred men and 
proper machinery,” he told them, “I would guarantee to send out one mil¬ 
lion dollars in diamonds every thirty days.” 

Returning to San Francisco a few days later, Ralston, Harpending, and 
company acted fast to form a $10 million corporation of private investors. 
First, however, they had to get rid of Arnold and Slack. That meant hiding 
their excitement—they certainly did not want to reveal the field’s red 
value. So they played possum. Who knows if Janin is right, they told the 
prospectors, the mine may not be as rich as we think. This just made the 
prospectors angry. Trying a different tactic, the financiers told the two men 
that if they insisted on having shares in the mine, they would end up being 
fleeced by the unscrupulous tycoons and investors who would run the cor¬ 
poration; better, they said, to take the $700,000 already offered—an enor 
mous sum at the time—and put their greed aside. This the prospectors 
seemed to understand, and they finally agreed to take the money, in return 
signing the rights to the site over to the financiers, and leaving maps to it. 

News of the mine spread like wildfire. Prospectors fanned out across 
Wyoming. Meanwhile Harpending and group began spending the millions 
they had collected from their investors, buying equipment, hiring the best 
men in the business, and furnishing luxurious offices in New York and San 
Francisco. 

A few weeks later, on their first trip back to the site, they learned the 
hard truth: Not a single diamond or ruby was to be found. It was all a fake. 
They were ruined. Harpending had unwittingly lured the richest men in 
the world into the biggest scam of the century. 

Interpretation 

Arnold and Slack pulled off their stupendous con not by using a fake engi¬ 
neer or bribing Tiffany: All of the experts had been real. All of them hon¬ 
estly believed in the existence of the mine and in the value of the gems. 
What had fooled them all was nothing else than Arnold and Slack them¬ 
selves. The two men seemed to be such rubes, such hayseeds, so naive, that 
no one for an instant had believed them capable of an audacious scam. 
The prospectors had simply observed the law of appearing more stupid 
than the mark—the deceiver’s First Commandment. 


158 \ LAW 21 



The logistics of the con were quite simple. Montlis before Arnold and 
Slack announced the “discovery” of the diamond mine, they traveled to 
Europe, where they purchased some real gems for around $12,000 (part of 
the money they had saved from their days as gold miners). They then 
salted the “mine” with these gems, which the first expert dug up and 
brought to San Francisco. The jewelers who had appraised these stones, in¬ 
cluding Tiffany himself, had gotten caught up in the fever and had grossly 
overestimated their value. Then Ralston gave the prospectors $100,000 as 
security, and immediately after their trip to New York they simply went to 
Amsterdam, where they bought sacks of uncut gems, before returning to 
San Francisco. The second time they salted the mine, there were many 
more jewels to be found. 

The effectiveness of the scheme, however, rested not on tricks like 
these but on the fact that Arnold and Slack played their parts to perfection. 
On their trip to New York, where they mingled with millionaires and ty¬ 
coons, they played up their clodhopper image, wearing pants and coats a 
size or two too small and acting incredulous at everything they saw in the 
big city. No one believed that these country simpletons could possibly be 
conning the most devious, unscrupulous financiers of the time. And once 
Harpending, Ralston, and even Rothschild accepted the mine’s existence, 
anyone who doubted it was questioning the intelligence of the world’s most 
successful businessmen. 

In the end. Harpending's reputation was ruined and he never recov¬ 
ered; Rothschild learned his lesson and never fell for another con; Slack 
took his money and disappeared from view, never to be found. Arnold 
simply went home to Kentucky. After all, his sale of his mining rights had 
been legitimate; the buyers had taken the best advice, and if the mine had 
run out of diamonds, that was their problem. Arnold used the money to 
greatly enlarge his farm and open up a bank of his own. 


KEYS TO POWER 

The feeling that someone else is more intelligent than we are is almost in¬ 
tolerable. We usually try to justify it in different ways; “He only has book 
knowledge, whereas I have real knowledge.” “Her parents paid for her to 
get a good education. If my parents had had as much money, if I had been 
as privileged...“He’s not as smart as he thinks.” Last but not least: “She 
may know her narrow little field better than I do, but beyond that she’s re¬ 
ally not smart at all. Even Einstein was a boob outside physics.” 

Given how important the idea of intelligence is to most people’s van¬ 
ity, it is critical never inadvertently to insult or impugn a person’s brain 
power. That is an unforgivable sin. But if you can make this iron rule work 
for you, it opens up all sorts of avenues of deception. Subliminally reassure 
people that they are more intelligent than you are, or even that you are a 
bit of a moron, and you can run rings around them. The feeling of intellec¬ 
tual superiority you give them will disarm their suspicion-muscles. 

In 1865 the Prussian councillor Otto von Bismarck wanted Austria to 



sign a certain treaty. The treaty was totally in the interests of Russia and 
against the interests of Austria, and Bismarck would have to strategize to 
get the Austrians to agree to it But the Austrian negotiator, Count Blome, 
was an avid cardplayer. His particular game was quinze, and he often said 
that he could judge a man’s character by the way he played quinze. Bis¬ 
marck knew of this saying of Blome’s. 

The night before the negotiations were to begin, Bismarck innocently 
engaged Blome in a game of quinze. The Prussian would later write, That 
was the very last time I ever played quinze, I played so recklessly that 
everyone was astonished. I lost several thousand talers [the currency of the 
time], but I succeeded in fooling [Blome], for he believed me to be more 
venturesome than I am and I gave way.” Besides appearing reckless, Bis¬ 
marck also played the witless fool, saying ridiculous things and bumbling 
about with a surplus of nervous energy. 

All this made Blome feel he had gathered valuable information. He 
knew that Bismarck was aggressive—the Prussian already had that reputa¬ 
tion, and the way he played had confirmed it. And aggressive men, Blome 
knew, can be foolish and rash. Accordingly, when the time came to sign 
the treaty, Blome thought he had the advantage. A heedless fool like Bis¬ 
marck, he thought, is incapable of cold-blooded calculation and deception, 
so he only glanced at the treaty before signing it—he failed to read the fine 
print. As soon as the ink was dry, a joyous Bismarck exclaimed in his face, 
“Well, I could never have believed that I should find an Austrian diplomat 
willing to sign that document!” 

The Chinese have a phrase, “Masquerading as a swine to kill the 
tiger.” This refers to an ancient hunting technique in which the hunter 
clothes himself in the hide and snout of a pig, and mimics its grunting. The 
mighty tiger thinks a pig is coming his way, and lets it get close, savoring 
the prospect of an easy meal. But it is the hunter who has the last laugh. 

Masquerading as a swine works wonders on those who, like tigers, are 
arrogant and overconfident: The easier they think it is to prey on you, the 
more easily you can turn the tables. This trick is also useful if you are ambi¬ 
tious yet find yourself low in the hierarchy: Appearing less intelligent than 
you are, even a bit of a fool, is the perfect disguise. Look like a harmless pig 
and no one will believe you harbor dangerous ambitions. They may even 
promote you since you seem so likable, and subservient. Claudius before 
he became emperor of Rome, and the prince of France who later became 
Louis XIII, used this tactic when those above them suspected they might 
have designs on the throne. By playing the fool as young men, they were 
left alone. When die time came for them to strike, and to act with vigor and 
decisiveness, they caught everyone off-guard. 

Intelligence is the obvious quality to downplay, but why stop there? 
Taste and sophistication rank close to intelligence on the vanity scale; 
make people feel they are more sophisticated than you are and their guard 
will come down. As Arnold and Slack knew, an air of complete naivete can 
work wonders. Those fancy financiers were laughing at them behind their 




backs, but who laughed loudest in the end? In general, then, always make 
people believe they are smarter and more sophisticated than you are. They 
will keep you around because you make them feel better about themselves, 
and the longer you are around, the more opportunities you will have to de¬ 
ceive them. 


Image: 

The Opossum. In playing 
dead, the opossum plays stupid. 

Many a predator has therefore left it 
alone. Who could believe that such an 
ugly, unintelligent, nervous little creature 
could be capable of such deception? 


Authority: Know how to make use of stupidity: The wisest man 
plays this card at times. There are occasions when the highest 
wisdom consists in appearing not to know—you must not be igno¬ 
rant but capable of playing it. It is not much good being wise 
among fools and sane among lunatics. He who poses as a fool is not 
a fool. The best way to be well received by all is to clothe yourself 
in the skin of the dumbest of brutes. (Baltasar Grad&n, 1601-1658) 


REVERSAL 

To reveal the true nature of your intelligence rarely pays; you should get in 
the habit of downplaying it at all times. If people inadvertently leam the 
truth—that you are actually much smarter than you look—they will admire 
you more for being discreet than for making your brilliance show. At the 
start of your climb to the top, of course, you cannot play too stupid: You 
may want to let your bosses know, in a subtle way, that you are smarter 
than the competition around you. As you climb the ladder, however, you 
should to some degree try to dampen your brilliance. 

There is, however, one situation where it pays to do the opposite— 
when you can cover up a deception with a show of intelligence. In matters 
of smarts as in most things, appearances are what count. If you seem to 
have authority and knowledge, people will believe what you say. This can 
be very useful in getting you out of a scrape. 

The art dealer Joseph Duveen was once attending a soiree at the New 
York home of a tycoon to whom he had recently sold a Diker painting for 



a high price. Among the guests was a young French art critic who seemed 
extremely knowledgeable and confident. Wanting to impress this man, the 
tycoon’s daughter showed him the Diirer, which had not yet been hung. 
The critic studied it for a time, then finally said, “You know, I don’t think 
this Diirer is right.” He followed the young woman as she hurried to tell 
her father what he had said, and listened as the magnate, deeply unsettled, 
turned to Duveen for reassurance. Duveen just laughed. “How very amus¬ 
ing,” he said. “Do you realize, young man, that at least twenty other art ex¬ 
perts here and in Europe have been taken in too, and have said that 
painting isn’t genuine? And now you’ve made the same mistake.” His con¬ 
fident tone and air of authority intimidated the Frenchman, who apolo¬ 
gized for his mistake. 

Duveen knew that the art market was flooded with fakes, and that 
many paintings had been falsely ascribed to old masters. He tried his best 
to distinguish the real from the fake, but in his zeal to sell he often over¬ 
played a work’s authenticity. What mattered to him was that the buyer be¬ 
lieved he had bought a Diirer, and that Duveen himself convinced 
everyone of his “expertness” through his air of irreproachable authority. 
Thus, it is important to be able to play the professor when necessary and 
never impose such an attitude for its own sake. 



LAW 


22 

USE THE SURRENDER 
TACTIC: TRANSFORM 
WEAKNESS INTO POWER 

JUDGMENT 

When you are weaker, never fight for honor’s sake; choose 
surrender instead. Surrender gives you time to recover, 
time to torment and irritate your conqueror, time to wait 
for his power to wane. Do not give him the satisfaction of 
fighting and defeating you—surrender first. By turning 
the other cheek you infuriate and unsettle him. Make 
surrender a tool of power. 



THK rm.S I'M I AND 
TIIK I IC I HI-I 

A man who had 
climbed upon a certain 
fig tree, was bending 
the boughs toward him 
and plucking the ripe 
fruit, which he then 
put into his mouth to 
destroy and gnaw 
with his hard teeth , The 
chestnut, seeing ihis , 
tossed its long branches 
and with tumultuous 
rustle exclaimed: “ Oh 
Fig! How much less 
protected by nature you 
are than /. See how my 
sweet offspring are set 
in close array; first 
clothed in soft wrap¬ 
pers over which is the 
hard but softly lined 
husk. And not content 
with this much care, 
nature has also given 
us these sharp and 
dose-set spines, so that 
the hand of man 
cannot hurt us. ” 
Then the fig tree began 
to laugh, and after the 
laughter it said: “You 
know well that man is 
of such ingenuity that 
he will bereave even 
you of your children. 
Bur in your case he will 
do it by means of rods 
and stones; and when 
they are felled he will 
trample, them with his 
feet or hit them with 
stones, so that your 
offspring will emerge 
from their armor 
crushed and maimed; 

while l am touched 
carefully by his hands, 
and never, like you, 
with roughness. ” 

Leonardo da Vinci, 
1452-1519 


764 ! LAW 22 


TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

The island of Melos is strategically situated in the heart of the Mediter¬ 
ranean. In classical times, the city of Athens dominated the sea and coastal 
areas around Greece, but Sparta, in the Peloponnese, had been Melos’s 
original colonizer. During the Peloponnesian War, then, the Melians re¬ 
fused to ally themselves with Athens and remained loyal to Mother Sparta. 
In 416 B.c. the Athenians sent an expedition against Melos. Before launch¬ 
ing an all-out attack, however, they dispatched a delegation to persuade the 
Melians to surrender and become an ally rather than suffer devastation and 
defeat. 

“You know as well as we do,” the delegates said, “that the standard of 
justice depends on the equality of power to compel, and that in fact the 
strong do what they have the power to do and the weak accept what they 
have to accept.” When the Melians responded that this denied the notion 
of fair play, the Athenians said that those in power determined what was 
fair and what was not. The Melians argued that this authority belonged to 
the gods, not to mortals. “Our opinion of the gods and our knowledge of 
men,” replied a member of the Athenian delegation, “lead us to conclude 
that it is a general and necessary law of nature to rule whatever one can.” 

The Melians would not budge. Sparta, they insisted, would come to 
their defense. The Athenians countered that the Spartans were a conserva¬ 
tive, practical people, and would not help Melos because they had nothing 
to gain and a lot to lose by doing so. 

Finally the Melians began to talk of honor and the principle of resisting 
brute force. “Do not be led astray by a false sense of honor,” said the Athe¬ 
nians. “Honor often brings men to ruin when they are faced with an obvi¬ 
ous danger that somehow affects their pride. There is nothing disgraceful in 
giving way to the greatest city in Hellas when she is offering you such rea¬ 
sonable terms.” The debate ended. The Melians discussed the issue among 
themselves, and decided to trust in the aid of the Spartans, the will of the 
gods, and the rightness of their cause. They politely declined the Athenians’ 
offer. 

A few days later the Athenians invaded Melos. The Melians fought 
nobly, even without the Spartans, who did not come to their rescue. It took 
several attempts before the Athenians could surround and besiege their 
main city, but the Melians finally surrendered. The Athenians wasted no 
time—they put to death all the men of military age that they could capture, 
they sold the women and children as slaves, and they repopulated the is¬ 
land with their own colonists. Only a handful of Melians survived. 

Interpretation 

The Athenians were one of the most eminently practical people in history, 
and they made the most practical argument they could with the Melians: 
When you are weaker, there is nothing to be gained by fighting a useless 
fight. No one comes to help the weak—by doing so they would only put 
themselves in jeopardy. The weak are alone and must submit. Fighting 




gives you nothing to gain but martyrdom, and in the process a lot of people 
who do not believe in your cause will die. 

Weakness is no sin, and can even become a strength if you learn how 
to play it right Had the Melians surrendered in the first place, they would 
have been able to sabotage the Athenians in subtle ways, or might have 
gotten what they could have out of the alliance and then left it when the 
Athenians themselves were weakened, as in fact happened several years 
later. Fortunes change and the mighty are often brought down. Surrender 
conceals great power: Lulling the enemy into complacency, it gives you 
time to recoup, time to undermine, time for revenge. Never sacrifice that 
time in exchange for honor in a battle that you cannot win. 

Weak people never give way when they ought to. 

Cardinal de Retz, 1613-3679 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

Sometime in the 1920s the German writer Bertolt Brecht became a convert 
to the cause of Communism. From then on his plays, essays, and poems re¬ 
flected his revolutionary fervor, and he generally tried to make his ideolog¬ 
ical statements as clear as possible. When Hitler came to power in 
Germany, Brecht and his Communist colleagues became marked men. He 
had many friends in the United States—Americans who sympathized with 
his beliefs, as well as fellow German intellectuals who had fled Hider. In 
1941, accordingly, Brecht emigrated to the United States, and chose to set¬ 
tle in Los Angeles, where he hoped to make a living in the film business. 

Over the next few years Brecht wrote screenplays with a pointedly an¬ 
ticapitalist slant. He had little success in Hollywood, so in 1947, the war 
having ended, he decided to return to Europe. That same year, however, 
the U.S. Congress’s House Un-American Activities Committee began its 
investigation into supposed Communist infiltration in Hollywood. It began 
to gather information on Brecht, who had so openly espoused Marxism, 
and on September 19, 1947, only a month before he had planned to leave 
the United States, he received a subpoena to appear before the committee. 
In addition to Brecht, a number of other writers, producers, and directors 
were summoned to appear as well, and this group came to be known as the 
Hollywood 19. 

Before going to Washington, the Hollywood 19 met to decide on a plan 
of action. Their approach would be confrontational. Instead of answering 
questions about their membership, or lack of it, in the Communist Party, 
they would read prepared statements that would challenge the authority of 
the committee and argue that its activities were unconstitutional. Even if 
this strategy meant imprisonment, it would gain publicity for their cause. 

Brecht disagreed. What good was it, he asked, to play the martyr and 
pin a little public sympathy if in the process they lost the ability to stage 
their plays and sell their scripts for years to come? He felt certain they were 


Voltaire was living in 
exile, in London at a 
time when anti-French 
sentiment was at 
its highest. One day 
walking through the 
streets, he found himself 
surrounded by an 
angry crowd . 'Liang 
him . Nang the French¬ 
man,” they yelled. 
Voltaire calmly 
addressed the mob with 
the following words: 

"Men of England! You 
wish to kill me because 
l am a Frenchman. Atn 
1 not punished enough 
in not being horn an 
Englishman?” The 
crowd cheered his 
thoughtful words, and 
escorted him safely 
back to his lodgings. 

THE LITTLE, BROWN 
BOOK Of ANECDOTES. 
Clifton Fadiman, ed., 
1985 


! 165 


LAW 22 




all more intelligent than the members of the committee. Why lower them¬ 
selves to the level of their opponents by arguing with them? Why not out¬ 
fox the committee by appearing to surrender to it while subtly mocking it? 
The Hollywood 19 listened to Brecht politely, but decided to stick to their 
plan, leaving Brecht to go his own way. 

The committee finally summoned Brecht on October 30. They ex¬ 
pected him to do what others among the Hollywood 19 who had testified 
before him had done; Argue, refuse to answer questions, challenge the 
committee's right to hold its hearing, even yell and hurl insults. Much to 
their surprise, however, Brecht was the very picture of congeniality. He 
wore a suit (something he rarely did), smoked a cigar (he had heard that 
the committee chairman was a passionate cigar smoker), answered their 
questions politely, and generally deferred to their authority. 

Unlike the other witnesses, Brecht answered the question of whether 
he belonged to the Communist Party; He was not a member, he said, 
which happened to be the truth. One committee member asked him, “Is it 
true you have written a number of revolutionary plays?” Brecht had writ¬ 
ten many plays with overt Communist messages, but he responded, “I 
have written a number of poems and songs and plays in the fight against 
Hitler and, of course, they can be considered, therefore, as revolutionary 
because I, of course, was for the overthrow of that government.” This state¬ 
ment went unchallenged. 

Brecht's English was more than adequate, but he used an interpreter 
throughout his testimony, a tactic that allowed him to play subtle games 
with language. When committee members found Communist leanings in 
lines from English editions of his poems, he would repeat the lines in Ger¬ 
man for the interpreter, who would then retranslate them; and somehow 
they would $ome out innocuous. At one point a committee member read 
one of Brecht’s revolutionary poems out loud in English, and asked him if 
he had written it. “No,” he responded, “I wrote a German poem, which is 
very different from this.” The author’s elusive answers baffled the commit¬ 
tee members, but his politeness and the way he yielded to their authority 
made it impossible for them to get angry with him. 

After only an hour of questioning, the committee members had had 
enough. “Thank you very much,” said the chairman, “You are a good ex¬ 
ample to the [other] witnesses.” Not only did they free him, they offered to 
help him if he had any trouble with immigration officials who might detain 
him for their own reasons. The following day, Brecht left the United States, 
never to return. 

Interpretation 

The Hollywood 19’s confrontational approach won them a lot of sympa¬ 
thy, and years later they gained a kind of vindication in public opinion. But 
they were also blacklisted, and lost valuable years of profitable working 
time. Brecht, on the other hand, expressed his disgust at the committee 
more indirectly. It was not that he changed his beliefs or compromised his 
values; instead, during his short testimony, he kept the upper hand by ap- 



pearing to yield while all the time running circles around the committee 
with vague responses, outright lies that went unchallenged because they 
were wrapped in enigmas, and word games. In the end he kept the free¬ 
dom to continue his revolutionary writing (as opposed to suffering impris¬ 
onment or detainment in the United States), even while subtly mocking the 
committee and its authority with his pseudo-obedience. 

Keep in mind the following: People trying to make a show of their au¬ 
thority are easily deceived by the surrender tactic. Your outward sign of 
submission makes them feel important; satisfied that you respect them, 
they become easier targets for a later counterattack, or for the kind of indi¬ 
rect ridicule used by Brecht. Measuring your power over time, never sacri¬ 
fice long-term maneuverability for the short-lived glories of martyrdom. 

When the great lord passes, the wise peasant bows deeply and silently farts . 

Ethiopian proverb 


KEYS TO POWER 

What gets us into trouble in the realm of power is often our own overreac¬ 
tion to the moves of our enemies and rivals. That overreaction creates 
problems we would have avoided had we been more reasonable. It also 
has an endless rebound effect, for the enemy then overreacts as well, much 
as the Athenians did to the Melians. It is always our first instinct to react, to 
meet aggression with some other kind of aggression. But the next time 
someone pushes you and you find yourself starting to react, try this: Do not 
resist or fight back, but yield, turn the other cheek, bend. You will find that 
this often neutralizes their behavior—they expected, even wanted you to 
react with force and so they are caught off-guard and confounded by your 
lack of resistance. By yielding, you in fact control the situation, because 
your surrender is part of a larger plan to lull them into believing they have 
defeated you. 

This is the essence of the surrender tactic: Inwardly you stay firm, but 
outwardly you bend. Deprived of a reason to get angry, your opponents 
will often be bewildered instead. And they are unlikely to react with more 
violence, which would demand a reaction from you. Instead you are al¬ 
lowed the time and space to plot the countermoves that will bring them 
down. In the battle of the intelligent against the brutal and the aggressive, 
the surrender tactic is the supreme weapon. It does require self-control: 
Those who genuinely surrender give up their freedom, and may be 
crushed by the humiliation of their defeat You have to remember that you 
only appear to surrender, like the animal that plays dead to save its hide. 

We have seen that it can be better to surrender than to fight; faced with 
a more powerful opponent and a sure defeat, it is often also better to sur¬ 
render than to run away. Running away may save you for the time being, 
but the aggressor will eventually catch up with you. If you surrender in¬ 
stead, you have an opportunity to coil around your enemy and strike with 
your fangs from close up. 



In 473 B.C., in ancient China, King Goujian of Yue suffered a horrible 
defeat from the ruler of Wu in the battle of Fujiao. Goujian wanted to flee, 
but he had an adviser who told him to surrender and to place himself in the 
service of the ruler of Wu, from which position he could study the man and 
plot his revenge. Deciding to follow this advice, Goujian gave the ruler all 
of his riches, and went to work in his conqueror’s stables as the lowest ser¬ 
vant. For three years he humbled himself before the ruler, who then, finally 
satisfied of his loyalty, allowed him to return home. Inwardly, however, 
Goujian had spent those three years gathering information and plotting re¬ 
venge. When a terrible drought struck Wu, and the kingdom was weak¬ 
ened by inner turmoil, he raised an army, invaded, and won with ease. 
That is the power behind surrender: It gives you the time and the flexibility 
to plot a devastating counterblow. Had Goujian run away, he would have 
lost this chance. 

When foreign trade began to threaten Japanese independence in the 
mid-nineteenth century, the Japanese debated how to defeat the foreign¬ 
ers. One minister, Hotta Masayoshi, wrote a memorandum in 1857 that in¬ 
fluenced Japanese policy for years to come: “I am therefore convinced that 
our policy should be to conclude friendly alliances, to send ships to foreign 
countries everywhere and conduct trade, to copy the foreigners where they 
are at their best and so repair our own shortcomings, to foster our national 
strength and complete our armaments, and so gradually subject the foreign¬ 
ers to our influence until in the end all the countries of the world know the 
blessings of perfect tranquillity and our hegemony is acknowledged 
throughout the globe.” This is a brilliant application of the Law: Use sur¬ 
render to gain access to your enemy. Learn his ways, insinuate yourself 
with him slowly, outwardly conform to his customs, but inwardly maintain 
your own culture. Eventually you will emerge victorious, for while he con¬ 
siders you weak and inferior, and takes no precautions against you, you are 
using tiie time to catch up and surpass him. This soft, permeable form of in¬ 
vasion is often the best, for the enemy has nothing to react against, prepare 
for, or resist. And had Japan resisted Western influence by force, it might 
well have suffered a devastating invasion that would have permanently al¬ 
tered its culture. 

Surrender can also offer a way of mocking your enemies, of turning 
their power against them, as it did for Brecht. Milan Kundera’s novel The 
Joke, based on the author’s experiences in a penal camp in Czechoslovakia, 
tells the story of how the prison guards organized a relay race, guards 
against prisoners. For the guards this was a chance to show off their physi¬ 
cal superiority. The prisoners knew they were expected to lose, so they 
went out of their way to oblige—miming exaggerated exertion while 
barely moving, running a few yards and collapsing, limping, jogging ever 
so slowly while the guards raced ahead at full speed. Both by joining the 
race and by losing it, they had obliged the guards obediently; but their 
“overobedience” had mocked the event to the point of ruining it Overobe- 
dience—surrender—was here a way to demonstrate superiority in a re¬ 
verse manner. Resistance would have engaged the prisoners in the cycle of 


LAW 22 



violence, lowering them to the guards’ level. Overobeying the guards, how¬ 
ever, made them ridiculous, yet they could not rightly punish the prison¬ 
ers, who had only done what they asked. 

Power is always in flux—since the game is by nature fluid, and an arena 
of constant struggle, those with power almost always find themselves even¬ 
tually on the downward swing. If you find yourself temporarily weakened, 
the surrender tactic is perfect for raising yourself up again—it disguises your 
ambition; it teaches you patience and self-control, key skills in the game; 
and it puts you in the best possible position for taking advantage of your op¬ 
pressor’s sudden slide. If you run away or fight back, in the long run you 
cannot win. If you surrender, you will almost always emerge victorious. 


Image: An Oak 
Tree. The oak 
that resists the 
wind loses its 
branches one 
by one, and 
with nothing 
left to protect 
it, the trunk fi¬ 
nally snaps. 

The oak that 
bends lives long¬ 
er, its trunk grow¬ 
ing wider, its roots 
deeper and more tenacious. 


Authority: Ye have heard that it hath been said. An eye for an eye 
and a tooth for a tooth: But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but 
whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other 
also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, 
let them have thy cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to 
go a mile, go with him twain. (Jesus Christ, in Matthew 5:38-41) 



REVERSAL 

The point of surrendering is to save your hide for a later date when you 
can reassert yourself. It is precisely to avoid martyrdom that one surren¬ 
ders, but there are times when the enemy will not relent, and martyrdom 
seems the only way out Furthermore, if you are willing to die, others may 
gain power and inspiration from your example. 

Yet martyrdom, surrender’s reversal, is a messy, inexact tactic, and is 
as violent as the aggression it combats. For every famous martyr there are 
thousands more who have inspired neither a religion nor a rebellion, so 
that if martyrdom does sometimes grant a certain power, it does so unpre- 
dictably. More important, you will not be around to enjoy that power, such 
as it is. And there is finally something selfish and arrogant about martyrs, 
as if they felt their followers were less important than their own glory. 

When power deserts you, it is best to ignore this Law’s reversal. Leave 
martyrdom alone: The pendulum will swing back your way eventually, 
and you should stay alive to see it. 



LAW 



CONCENTRATE 
YOUR FORCES 


JUDGMENT 

Conserve your forces and energies by keeping them 
concentrated at their strongest point. You gain more by 
finding a rick mine and mining it deeper, than by flit¬ 
ting from one shallow mine to another—intensity defeats 
extensity every time. When looking for sources of power to 
elevate you, find the one key patron, the fat cow who will 
give you milk for a long time to come. 



THK L'OOSL AND 
THE HOUSE 

A goose who was 
plucking grass upon a 
common thought 
herself affronted by a 
horse who fed near her; 
and. i.n hissing accents, 
thus addressed him: “I 
am certainly a more 
noble and perfect 
animal than you, for 
the whale range and 
extent of your faculties 
is confined to one 
element. / can walk 
upon the ground as 
well as you; I have, 
besides, wings, with 
which l can raise 
myself in the air; and 
when 1 please. I can 
sport on ponds and 
lakes, and refresh 
myself in ihe >ol 
waters. I enjoy the 
different powers of a 
bird, a fish , and a 
quadruped. '* 
The horse, snorting 
somewhat disdainfully, 
replied: “It is true you 
inhabit three elements. 
but you make no very 
distinguished figure in 
any one of them. You 
fly, indeed; but your 
flight is so heavy and 
clumsy, that you have 
no right to put yourself 
on a level with the lark 
or the swallow. You can 
swim on ihe surface of 
the waters, but you 
carmen live in them as 
fishes do; you cannot 
find your food in that 
element, nor glide 
smoothly along the 
bottom of the waves. 
And when you walk , or 
rather waddle, upon 
the ground, with your 
broad feet and your 
long neck stretched out. 


TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

In China in the early sixth century B.C., the kingdom of Wu began a war 
with the neighboring northern provinces of the Middle Kingdom. Wu was 
a growing power, but it lacked the great history and civilization of the Mid¬ 
dle Kingdom, for centuries the center of Chinese culture. By defeating the 
Middle Kingdom, the king of Wu would instantly raise his status. 

The war began with great fanfare and several victories, but it soon 
bogged down. A victory on one front would leave the Wu armies vulnera¬ 
ble on another. The king’s chief minister and adviser, Wu Tzu-hsiu, warned 
him that the barbarous state of Yueh, to the south, was beginning to notice 
the kingdom of Wu’s problems and had designs to invade. The king only 
laughed at such worries—one more big victory and the great Middle King¬ 
dom would be his. 

In the year 490, Wu Tzu-hsiu sent his son away to safety in the king¬ 
dom of Ch’i In doing so he sent the king a signal that he disapproved of 
the war, and that he believed the king’s selfish ambition was leading Wu to 
ruin. The king, sensing betrayal, lashed out at his minister, accusing him of 
a lack of loyalty and, in a fit of anger, ordered him to kill himself. Wu Tzu- 
hsiu obeyed his king, but before he plunged the knife into his chest, he 
cried, “Tear out my eyes, oh King, and fix them on the gate of Wu, so that I 
may see the triumphant entry of Yueh.” 

As Wu Tzu-hsiu had predicted, within a few years a Yueh army passed 
beneath the gate of Wu. As the barbarians surrounded the palace, die king 
remembered his minister’s last words—and felt the dead man’s disembod¬ 
ied eyes watching his disgrace. Unable to bear his shame, the king killed 
himself, “covering his face so that he would not have to meet the reproach¬ 
ful gaze of his minister in the next world.” 

Interpretation 

The story of Wu is a paradigm of all the empires that have come to ruin by 
overreaching. Drunk with success and sick with ambition, such empires ex¬ 
pand to grotesque proportions and meet a ruin that is total. This is what 
happened to ancient Athens, which lusted for the faraway island of Sicily 
and ended up losing its empire. The Romans stretched the boundaries of 
their empire to encompass vast territories; in doing so they increased their 
vulnerability, and the chances of invasion from yet another barbarian tribe. 
Their useless expansion led their empire into oblivion. 

For die Chinese, the fate of the kingdom of Wu serves as an elemental 
lesson on what happens when you dissipate your forces on several fronts, 
losing sight of distant dangers for the sake of present gain. “If you are not in 
danger,” says Sun-tzu, “do not fight” It is almost a physical law: What is 
bloated beyond its proportions inevitably collapses. The mind must not 
wander from goal to goal, or be distracted by success from its sense of pur¬ 
pose and proportion. What is concentrated, coherent, and connected to its 
past has power. What is dissipated, divided, and distended rots and falls to 
the ground. The bigger it bloats, the harder it falls. 


172 : LAW 23 



OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

The Rothschild banking family had humble beginnings in the Jewish 
ghetto of Frankfurt, Germany, The city’s harsh laws made it impossible for 
Jews to mingle outside the ghetto, but the Jews had turned this into a 
virtue—it made them self-reliant, and zealous to preserve their culture at 
all costs. Mayer Amschel, the first of the Rothschilds to accumulate wealth 
by lending money, in the late eighteenth century, well understood the 
power that comes from this kind of concentration and cohesion. 

First, Mayer Amschel allied himself with one family, the powerful 
princes of Thum und Taxis. Instead of spreading his services out, he made 
himself these princes’ primary banker. Second, he entrusted none of his 
business to outsiders, using only his children and close relatives. The more 
unified and tight-knit the family, the more powerful it would become. Soon 
Mayer Amschel’s five sons were running the business. And when Mayer 
Amschel lay dying, in 1812, he refused to name a principal heir, instead set¬ 
ting up all of his sons to continue the family tradition, so that they would 
stay united and would resist the dangers of diffusion and of infiltration by 
outsiders. 

Once Mayer Amschel’s sons controlled the family business, they de¬ 
cided that the key to wealth on a larger scale was to secure a foothold in the 
finances of Europe as a whole, rather than being tied to any one country or 
prince. Of the five brothers, Nathan had already opened up shop in Lon¬ 
don. In 1813 James moved to Paris. Amschel remained in Frankfurt, 
Salomon established himself in Vienna, and Karl, the youngest son, went 
to Naples. With each sphere of influence covered, they could tighten their 
hold on Europe’s financial markets. 

This widespread network, of course, opened the Rothschilds to the 
very danger of which their father had warned them: diffusion, division, dis¬ 
sension. They avoided this danger, and established themselves as the most 
powerful force in European finance and politics, by once again resorting to 
the strategy of the ghetto—-excluding outsiders, concentrating their forces. 
The Rothschilds established the fastest courier system in Europe, allowing 
them to get news of events before all their competitors. They held a virtual 
monopoly on information. And their internal communications and corre¬ 
spondence were written in Frankfurt Yiddish, and in a code that only the 
brothers could decipher. There was no point in stealing this information- 
no one could understand it. “Even the shewdest bankers cannot find their 
way through the Rothschild maze,” admitted a financier who had tried to 
infiltrate the clan. 

In 1824 James Rothschild decided it was time to get married. This pre¬ 
sented a problem for the Rothschilds, since it meant incorporating an out¬ 
sider into the Rothschild clan, an outsider who could betray its secrets. 
James therefore decided to marry within the family, and chose the daugh¬ 
ter of his brother Salomon. The brothers were ecstatic—this was the per¬ 
fect solution to their marriage problems. James’s choice now became the 
family policy; Two years later, Nathan married off his daughter to 


fussing at everyone 
who posses by, you 
bring upon yourself the 
derision of all behold¬ 
ers. I confess that / am 
only formed to move 
upon the ground, but 
how graceful is my 
make! How well turned 
my limbs! How highly 
finished my whole, 
body! How great my 
strength! How aston¬ 
ishing my speed! I had 
much rather be 
confined to one 
element > and be 
admired in that, than 
be a goose in all!” 

FABI CS FROM 
BOCCACCIO AND 
CHAUCER, 

Dr. John Ajkin. 
1747-1822 


Beware of dissipating 
your powers; strive 
constantly to concen¬ 
trate them■ Genius 
thinks it can do what¬ 
ever it sees others 
doing, but it is sure to 
repent of every ill- 
judged outlay. 

Johann von Goethe. 
1749-1832 


LAW 23 173 



Salomon’s son. In the years to come, the five brothers arranged eighteen 
matches among their children, sixteen of these being contracted between 
first cousins. 

“We are like the mechanism of a watch: Each part is essential,” said 
brother Salomon. As in a watch, every part of the business moved in con¬ 
cert with every other, and the inner workings were invisible to the world, 
which only saw the movement of the hands. While other rich and powerful 
families suffered irrecoverable downturns during the tumultous first half of 
the nineteenth century, the tight-knit Rothschilds managed not only to pre¬ 
serve but to expand their unprecedented wealth. 

Interpretation 

The Rothschilds were bom in strange times. They came from a place that 
had not changed in centuries, but lived in an age that gave birth to the In¬ 
dustrial Revolution, the French Revolution, and an endless series of up¬ 
heavals. The Rothchilds kept the past alive, resisted the patterns of 
dispersion of their era and for this are emblematic of the law of concentra¬ 
tion. 

No one represents this better than James Rothschild, the son who es¬ 
tablished himself in Paris. In his lifetime James witnessed the defeat of 
Napoleon, the restoration of the Bourbon monarchy, the bourgeois monar¬ 
chy of Orleans, the return to a republic, and finally the enthronement of 
Napoleo i III. French styles and fashions changed at a relentless pace dur¬ 
ing all this turmoil. Without appearing to be a relic of the past, James 
steered his family as if the ghetto lived on within them. He kept alive his 
clan’s inner cohesion and strength. Only through such an anchoring in the 
past was the family able to thrive amidst such chaos. Concentration was the 
foundation of the Rothschilds’ power, wealth, and stability. 

The best strategy is always to be very strong; first in general, then 
at the decisive poin t. . . . There is no higher and simpler law of strategy 
than that of keeping one's forces concentrated. ... In short the 
first principle is: act with the utmost concentration. 

On War, Carl von Clausewitz, 1780-1831 


KEYS TO POWER 

The world is plagued by greater and greater division—within countries, 
political groups, families, even individuals. We are all in a state of total dis¬ 
traction and diffusion, hardly able to keep our minds in one direction be¬ 
fore we are pulled in a thousand others. The modern world’s level of 
conflict is higher than ever, and we have internalized it in our own lives. 

The solution is a form of retreat inside ourselves, to the past, to more 
concentrated forms of thought and action. As Schopenhauer wrote, “Intel¬ 
lect is a magnitude of intensity, not a magnitude of extensity.” Napoleon 
knew the value of concentrating your forces at the enemy’s weakest spot— 




it was the secret of his success on the battlefield. But his willpower and his 
mind were equally modeled on this notion. Single-mindedness of purpose, 
total concentration on the goal, and the use of these qualities against peo¬ 
ple less focused, people in a state of distraction—such an arrow will find its 
mark every time and overwhelm the enemy. 

Casanova attributed his success in life to his ability to concentrate on a 
single goal and push at it until it yielded. It was his ability to give himself 
over completely to the women he desired that made him so intensely se¬ 
ductive. For the weeks or months that one of these women lived in his 
orbit, he thought of no one else. When he was imprisoned in the treacher¬ 
ous “leads” of the doge’s palace in Venice, a prison from which no one had 
ever escaped, he concentrated his mind on the single goal of escape, day 
after day. A change of cells, which meant (hat months of digging had all 
been for naught, did not discourage him; he persisted and eventually es¬ 
caped. “I have always believed,” he later wrote, “that when a man gets it 
into his head to do something, and when he exclusively occupies himself in 
that design, he must succeed, whatever the difficulties. That man will be¬ 
come Grand Vizier or Pope.” 

Concentrate cia single goal, a single task, and beat it into submission. 
In the world of power you will constantly need help from other people, 
usually those more powerful than you. The fool flits from one person to an¬ 
other, believing that he will survive by spreading himself out. It is a corol¬ 
lary of the law of concentration, however, that much energy is saved, and 
more power is attained, by affixing yourself to a single, appropriate source 
of power. The scientist Nikola Tesla ruined himself by believing that he 
somehow maintained his independence by not having to serve a single 
master. He even turned down J. P. Morgan, who offered him a rich con¬ 
tract. In the end, Tesla’s “independence” meant that he could depend on 
no single patron, but was always having to toady up to a dozen of them, 
later in his life he realized his mistake. 

All the great Renaissance painters and writers wrestled with this prob¬ 
lem, none more so than the sixteenth-century writer Pietro Aretino. 
Throughout his life Aretino suffered the indignities of having to please this 
prince and that. At last, he had had enough, and decided to woo Charles 
V, promising the emperor the services of his powerful pen. He finally dis¬ 
covered the freedom that came from attachment to a single source of 
power. Michelangelo found this freedom with Pope Julius II, Galileo with 
the Medicis. In the end, the single patron appreciates your loyalty and be¬ 
comes dependent on your services; in the long run the master serves the 
slave. 

Finally, power itself always exists in concentrated forms. In any orga¬ 
nization it is inevitable for a small group to hold the strings. And often it is 
not those with the titles. In the game of power, only the fool flails about 
without fixing his target. You must find out who controls the operations, 
who is the real director behind the scenes. As Richelieu discovered at the 
beginning of his rise to the top of the French political scene during the 



early seventeenth century, it was not King Louis XIII who decided things, 
it was the king’s mother. And so he attached himself to her, and catapulted 
through the ranks of the courtiers, all the way to the top. 

It is enough to strike oil once—your wealth and power are assured for 
a lifetime. 


Imager The Arrow. You cannot hit two targets 
with one arrow. If your thoughts stray, you 
miss the enemy’s heart. Mind and 
arrow must become one. Only 
with such concentration of 
mental and physical 
power can your arrow 
hit the target and 
pierce the 
heart. 


Authority: Prize intensity more than extensity. Perfection re¬ 
sides in quality, not quantity. Extent alone never rises above 
mediocrity, and it is the misfortune of men with wide general 
interests that while they would like to have their finger in every 
pie, they have one in none. Intensity gives eminence, and rises 
to the heroic in matters sublime. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658) 


REVERSAL 

There are dangers in concentration, and moments when dispersion is the 
proper tactical move. Fighting the Nationalists for control of China, Mao 
Tse-tung and the Communists fought a protracted war on several fronts, 
using sabotage and ambush as their main weapons. Dispersal is often suit¬ 
able for the weaker side; it is, in fact, a crucial principle of guerrilla warfare. 
When fighting a stronger army, concentrating your forces only makes you 
an easier target—better to dissolve into the scenery and frustrate your 
enemy with the elusiveness of your presence. 

Tying yourself to a single source of power has one preeminent danger: 
If that person dies, leaves, or falls from grace, you suffer. This is what hap¬ 
pened to Cesare Borgia, who derived his power from his father, Pope 
Alexander VI. It was the pope who gave Cesare armies to fight with and 
wars to wage in his name. When he suddenly died (perhaps from poison), 



Cesare was as good as dead. He had made far too many enemies over the 
years, and was now without his fathers protection. In cases when you may 
need protection, then, it is often wise to entwine yourself around several 
sources of power Such a move would be especially prudent in periods of 
great tumult and violent change, or when your enemies are numerous. The 
more patrons and masters you serve the less risk you run if one of them 
falls from power. Such dispersion will even allow you to play one off 
against the other. Even if you concentrate on the single source of power, 
you still must practice caution, and j repare for the day when your master 
or patron is no longer there to help you. 

Finally, being too single-minded in purpose can make you an intolera¬ 
ble bore, especially in the arts. The Renaissance painter Paolo Uccello was 
so obsessed with perspective that his paintings look lifeless and contrived. 
Whereas Leonardo da Vinci interested himself in everything—architec¬ 
ture, painting, warfare, sculpture, mechanics. Diffusion was the source of 
his power. But such genius is rare, and the rest of us axe better off erring on 
the side of intensity. 



LAW 



PLAY THE PERFECT 
COURTIER 


JUDGMENT 

The perfect courtier thrives in a world where everything 
revolves around power and political dexterity. He has 
mastered the art of indirection; he flatters , yields to supe¬ 
riors, and asserts power over others in the most oblique 
and graceful manner. Learn and apply the laws of 
courtiership and there will be no limit to how far you can 
rise in the court. 



COURT SOCIETY 

It is a fact of human nature t^>t the structure of a court society forms itself 
around power. In the past, the court gathered around the ruler, and had 
many functions: Besides keeping the ruler amused, it was a way to solidify 
the hierarchy of royalty, nobility, and die upper classes, and to keep the 
nobility both subordinate and close to the ruler, so that he could keep an 
eye on them. The court serves power in many ways, but most of all it glori¬ 
fies the ruler, providing him with a microcosmic world that must struggle 
to please him. 

To be a courtier was a dangerous game. A nineteenth-century Arab 
traveler to the court of Darfur, in what is now Sudan, reported that 
courtiers there had to do whatever the sultan did: If he were injured, they 
had to suffer the same injury; if he fell off his horse during a hunt, they fell, 
too. Mimicry like this appeared in courts all over the world. More trouble¬ 
some was the danger of displeasing the ruler—one wrong move spelled 
death or exile. The successful courtier had to walk a tightrope, pleasing but 
not pleasing too much, obeying but somehow distinguishing himself from 
the other courtiers, while also never distinguishing himself so far as to 
make die ruler insecure. 

Great courtiers throughout history have mastered the science of ma¬ 
nipulating people. They make the king feel more kingly; they make every¬ 
one else fear their power. They are magicians of appearance, knowing that 
most things at court are judged by how they seem. Great courtiers are gra¬ 
cious and polite; their aggression is veiled and indirect. Masters of the 
word, they never say more than necessary, getting the most out of a com¬ 
pliment or hidden insult They are magnets of pleasure—people want to be 
around them because they know how to please, yet they neither fawn nor 
humiliate themselves. Great courtiers become the king’s favorites, enjoying 
die benefits of that position. They often end up more powerful than the 
ruler, for they are wizards in the accumulation of influence. 

Many today dismiss court life as a relic of the past, a historical curios¬ 
ity. They reason, according to Machiavelli, “as though heaven, the sun, the 
elements, and men had changed the order of their motions and power, and 
were different from what they were in ancient times.” There may be no 
more Sun Kings but there are still plenty of people who believe the sun re¬ 
volves around them. The royal court may have more or less disappeared, 
or at least lost its power, but courts and courtiers still exist because power 
still exists. A courtier is rarely asked to fall off a horse anymore, but the 
laws that govern court politics are as timeless as the laws of power. There is 
much to be learned, then, from great courtiers past and present. 

THE LAWS OF COURT POLITICS 

Avoid Ostentation. It is never prudent to prattle on about yourself or call 
too much attention to your actions. The more you talk about your deeds 


THK TWO DOCS 

Barbas, the faithful 
yard-dog who serves 
his maner zealously. 
happens to see his old 
acquaintance Joujou, 
the curly lapdog, seated 
at the window on a soft 
down cushion. Sidling 
fondly up to her, like u 
child to a parent, he all 
but weeps with 
emotion; and there, 
under the window , he 
whines, wags his tail , 
and bounds about. 
"What sort of life do 
you lead now, 

Joujoutka , ever since 
the master took you 
into his mansion? You 
remember, no doubt, 
how we often used to 
suffer hunger out in the 
yard. What is your 
present service like?" 
"It would be a sin in 
me to murmur against 
my good fortune, ” 
answers Joujoutka. 

"My master cannot 
make, enough of me. f 
live amidst riches and 
plenty, and / eat and 
drink off silver. I frolic 
with the master, and, if 
/ get tired, l take my 
ease on carpets or on a 
soft couch. And how do 
you get on? *' "l? " 
replies Bat hos, letting 
his tail dangle like a 
whip, and hanging his 
head. *7 live as l used 
to do. I suffer from 
cold and hunger; and 
here, while guarding 
my master'x house, l 
have to sleep at the foot 
of the wall, and f get 
drenched in the rain. 
And if l bark at the 
wrong time, / am 
whipped. But how did 
you, Joujou, who were 


LAW 24 179 



so small and weak, get 
taken into favor, white 
I jump out of my skin 
to no purpose? 

What is it you do? " 
“ 1 What is it you do? ’ A 
pretty question to ask!" 
replied Joujou, mock¬ 
ingly. "I walk upon my 
hind legs. ” 
FA BI.ES, 

Ivan Kriloff, 
1768-1844 


It is a wise thing to be 
polite; consequently, it 
is a stupid thing to be 
rude. To make enemies 
by unnecessary and 
wilful incivility, is just 
as insane a proceeding 
as to set your house on 
fire. For politeness is 
like a counter—an 
avowedly false coin, 
with which it is foolish 
to be stingy. A sensible 
man will be generous 
in the use of it.... Wax, 
a substance naturally 
hard and brittle, can be 
made soft by the appli¬ 
cation of a little 
warmth, so that it will 
take any shape you 
please. In the same 
way, by being polite 
and friendly, you can 
make people pliable 
and obliging, even 
though they are apt to 
be crabbed and malev¬ 
olent. Hence, politeness 
is to human nature 
what warmth is to wax. 

Arthur 

SCHOPENHAUER, 

1788-1860 


ISO LAW 24 


the more suspicion you cause. You also stir up enough envy among your 
peers to induce treachery and backstabbing. Be careful, ever so careful, in 
trumpeting your own achievements, and always talk less about yourself 
than about other people. Modesty is generally preferable. 

Practice Nonchalance. Never seem to be working too hard. Your talent 
must appear to flow naturally, with an ease that makes people take you for 
a genius rather than a workaholic. Even when something demands a lot of 
sweat, make it look effortless—people prefer to not see your blood and toil, 
which is another form of ostentation. It is better for them to marvel at how 
gracefully you have achieved your accomplishment than to wonder why it 
took so much work. 

Be Frugal with Flattery. It may seem that your superiors cannot get 
enough flattery, but too much of even a good thing loses its value. It also 
stirs up suspicion among your peers. Learn to flatter indirectly—by down¬ 
playing your own contribution, for example, to make your master look bet¬ 
ter. 

Arrange to Be Noticed. There is a paradox: You cannot display yourself 
too brazenly, yet you must also get yourself noticed. In the court of Louis 
XIV, whoever the king decided to look at rose instantly in the court hierar¬ 
chy. You stand no chance of rising if the ruler does not notice you in the 
swamp of courtiers. This task requires much art. It is often initially a matter 
of being seen, in the literal sense. Pay attention to your physical appear¬ 
ance, then, and find a way to create a distinctive—a subtly distinctive—style 
and image. 

Alter Your Style and Language According to the Person You Are 
Dealing With. The pseudo-belief in equality—the idea that talking and 
acting the same way with everyone, no matter what their rank, makes you 
somehow a paragon of civilization—is a terrible mistake. Those below you 
will take it as a form of condescension, which it is, and those above you will 
be offended, although they may not admit it. You must change your style 
and your way of speaking to suit each person. This is not lying, it is acting, 
and acting is an art, not a gift from God. Learn the art This is also true for 
the great variety of cultures found in the modern court: Never assume that 
your criteria of behavior and judgment are universal. Not only is an inabil¬ 
ity to adapt to another culture the height of barbarism, it puts you at a dis¬ 
advantage. 

Never Be the Bearer of Bad News. The king kills the messenger who 
brings bad news: This is a cliche but there is truth to it. You must struggle 
and if necessary lie and cheat to be sure that the lot of the bearer of bad 
news falls on a colleague, never on you. Bring only good news and your 
approach will gladden your master. 



Never Affect Friendliness and Intimacy with Your Master. He does 
not want a friend for a subordinate, he wants a subordinate. Never ap¬ 
proach him in an easy, friendly way, or act as if you are on the best of 
terms—that is his prerogative. If he chooses to deal with you on this level, 
assume a wary chumminess. Otherwise err in the opposite direction, and 
make the distance between you clear. 

Never Criticize Those Above You Directly. This may seem obvious, 
but there are often times when some sort of criticism is necessary—to say 
nothing, or to give no advice, would open you to risks of another sort. You 
must learn, however, to couch your advice and criticism as indirectly and as 
politely as possible. Think twice, or three times, before deciding you have 
made them sufficiently circuitous. Err on the side of subtlety and gentleness. 

Be Frugal in Asking Those Above You for Favors. Nothing irritates a 
master more than having to reject someone’s request It stirs up guilt and 
resentment. Ask for favors as rarely as possible, and know when to stop. 
Rather than making yourself the supplicant, it is always better to earn your 
favors, so that the ruler bestows them willingly. Most important: Do not ask 
for favors on another person’s behalf, least of all a friend’s. 

Never Joke About Appearances or Taste. A lively wit and a humorous 
disposition are essential qualities for a good courtier, and there are times 
when vulgarity is appropriate and engaging. But avoid any kind of joke 
about appearance or taste, two highly sensitive areas, especially with those 
above you. Do not even try it when you are away from them. You will dig 
your own grave. 

Do Not Be the Court Cynic. Express admiration for the good work of 
others. If you constantly criticize your equals or subordinates some of that 
criticism will rub off on you, hovering over you like a gray cloud wherever 
you go. People will groan at each new cynical comment, and you will irri¬ 
tate them. By expressing modest admiration for other people’s achieve¬ 
ments, you paradoxically call attention to your own. The ability to express 
wonder and amazement, and seem like you mean it, is a rare and dying tal¬ 
ent, but one still greatly valued. 

Be Seif-observant The mirror is a miraculous invention; without it you 
would commit great sins against beauty and decorum. You also need a mir¬ 
ror for your actions. This can sometimes come from other people telling 
you what they see in you, but that is not the most trustworthy method: You 
must be the mirror, training your mind to try to see yourself as others see 
you. Are you acting too obsequious? Are you trying too hard to please? Do 
you seem desperate for attention, giving the impression that you are on the 
decline? Be observant about yourself and you will avoid a mountain of 
blunders. 



Master Your Emotions. As an actor in a great play, you must learn to cry 
and laugh on command and when it is appropriate. You must be able both 
to disguise your anger and frustration and to fake your contentment and 
agreement. You must be the master of your own face. Call it lying if you 
like; but if you prefer to not play the game and to always be honest and up¬ 
front, do not complain when others call you obnoxious and arrogant. 

Fit the Spirit of the Times. A slight affectation of a past era can be 
charming, as long as you choose a period at least twenty years back; wear¬ 
ing the fashions of ten years ago is ludicrous, unless you enjoy the role of 
court jester. Your spirit and way of thinking must keep up with the times, 
even if the times offend your sensibilities. Be too forward-thinking, how¬ 
ever, ^ad no one will understand you. It is never a good idea to stand out 
too much in this area; you are best off at least being able to mimic the spirit 
of the times. 

Be a Source of Pleasure. This is critical. It is an obvious law of human 
nature that we will flee what is unpleasant and distasteful, while charm and 
the promise of delight will draw us like moths to a flame. Make yourself the 
flame and you will rise to the top. Since life is otherwise so full of unpleas¬ 
antness and pleasure so scarce, you will be as indispensable as food and 
drink. This may seem obvious, but what is obvious is often ignored or un¬ 
appreciated. There are degrees to this: Not everyone can play the role of 
favorite, for not everyone is blessed with charm and wit But we can all 
control our unpleasant qualities and obscure them when necessary. 

A man who knows the court is master of his gestures, of his eyes and 
of his face; he is profound, impenetrable; he dissimulates bad offices , 
smiles at his enemies; controls his irritation , disguises kis passions, 
belies his heart, speaks and acts against his feelings . 

Jean de La Bruyere, 1645-1696 


SCENES OF COURT LIFE: Exemplary Deeds and Fatal Mistakes 


Scene I 

Alexander the Great, conqueror of the Mediterranean basin and the Mid¬ 
dle East through to India, had had the great Aristotle as his tutor and men¬ 
tor, and throughout his short life he remained devoted to philosophy and 
his master’s teachings. He once complained to Aristotle that during his 
long campaigns he had no one with whom he could discuss philosophical 
matters. Aristotle responded by suggesting that he take Callisthenes, a for¬ 
mer pupil of Aristotle’s and a promising philosopher in his own right, 
along on the next campaign. 

Aristotle had schooled Callisthenes in the skills of being a courtier, but 



the young man secretly scoffed at them. He believed in pure philosophy, in 
unadorned words, in speaking the naked truth. If Alexander loved learning 
so much, Callisthenes thought, he could not object to one who spoke his 
mind. During one of Alexander’s major campaigns, Callisthenes spoke his 
mind one too many times and Alexander had him put to death. 
Interpretation 

In court, honesty is a fool’s game. Never be so self-absorbed as to believe 
that the master is interested in your criticisms of him, no matter how accu¬ 
rate they are. 

Scene II 

Beginning in the Han Dynasty two thousand years ago, Chinese scholars 
compiled a series of writings called the 21 Histories, an official biography of 
each dynasty, including stories, statistics, census figures, and war chroni¬ 
cles. Each history also contained a chapter called “Unusual Events,” and 
here, among the listings of earthquakes and floods, there would sometimes 
suddenly appear descriptions of such bizarre manifestations as two-headed 
sheep, geese flying backward, stars suddenly appearing in different parts of 
fire sky, and so on. The earthquakes could be historically verified, but the 
monsters and weird natural phenomena were clearly inserted on purpose, 
and invariably occurred in clusters. What could this mean ? 

The Chinese emperor was considered more than a man—he was a 
force of nature. His kingdom was the center of the universe, and every¬ 
thing revolved around him. He embodied the world’s perfection. To criti¬ 
cize him or any of his actions would have been to criticize the divine order. 
No minister or courtier dared approach the emperor with even the slightest 
cautionary word. But emperors were fallible and the kingdom suffered 
greatly by their mistakes. Inserting sightings of strange phenomena into the 
court chronicles was the only way to warn them. The emperor would read 
of geese flying backward and moons out of orbit, and realize that he was 
being cautioned. His actions were unbalancing the universe and needed to 
change. 

Interpretation 

For Chinese courtiers, the problem of how to give the emperor advice was 
an important issue. Over the years, thousands of them had died trying to 
warn or counsel their master. To be made safely, their criticisms had to be 
indirect—yet if they were too indirect they would not be heeded. The 
chronicles were their solution: Identify no one person as the source of criti¬ 
cism, make the advice as impersonal as possible, but let the emperor know 
the gravity of the situation. 

Your master is no longer the center of the universe, but he still imag¬ 
ines that everything revolves around him. When you criticize him he sees 
the person criticizing, not the criticism itself. like the Chinese courtiers, 
you must find a way to disappear behind the warning. Use symbols and 
other indirect methods to paint a picture of the problems to come, without 
putting your neck on the line. 



Scene III 

Early in his career, the French architect Jules Mansart received commis¬ 
sions to design minor additions to Versailles for King Louis XIV. For each 
design he would draw up his plans, making sure they followed Louis’s in¬ 
structions closely. He would then present them to His Majesty. 

The courtier Saint-Simon described Mansart’s technique in dealing 
with the king: “His particular skill was to show the king plans that pur¬ 
posely included something imperfect about them, often dealing with the 
gardens, which were not Mansart’s specialty. The king, as Mansart ex¬ 
pected, would put his finger exactly on the problem and propose how to 
solve it, at which point Mansart would exclaim for all to hear that he would 
never have seen the problem that the king had so masterfully found and 
solved; he would burst with admiration, confessing that next to the king he 
was but a lowly pupil.” At the age of thirty, having used these methods 
time and time again, Mansart received a prestigious royal commission: Al¬ 
though he was less talented and experienced than a number of other 
French designers, he was to take charge of the enlargement of Versailles. 
He was the king’s architect from then on. 

Interpretation 

As a young man, Mansart had seen how many royal craftsmen in the ser¬ 
vice of Louis XIV had lost their positions not through a lack of talent but 
through a costly social blunder. He would not make that mistake. Mansart 
always strove to make Louis feel better about himself, to feed the king’s 
vanity as publicly as possible. 

Never imagine that skill and talent are all that matter. In court the 
courtier’s art is more important than his talent; never spend so much time 
on your studies that you neglect your social skills. And the greatest skill of 
all is the ability to make the master look more talented than those around 
him. 

Scene IV 

Jean-Baptiste Isabey had become the unofficial painter of the Napoleonic 
court. During die Congress of Vienna in 1814, after Napoleon, defeated, 
had been imprisoned on the island of Elba, the participants in these meet¬ 
ings, which were to decide the fate of Europe, invited Isabey to immortal¬ 
ize the historic events in an epic painting. 

When Isabey arrived in Vienna, Talleyrand, the main negotiator for 
the French, paid the artist a visit. Considering his role in the proceedings, 
the statesman explained, he expected to occupy center stage in the paint¬ 
ing. Isabey cordially agreed. A few days later the Duke of Wellington, the 
main negotiator for the English, also approached Isabey, and said much 
the same thing that Talleyrand had. The ever polite Isabey agreed that the 
great duke should indeed be the center of attention. 

Back in his studio, Isabey pondered the dilemma. If he gave the spot¬ 
light to either of the two men, he could create a diplomatic rift, stirring up 
all sorts of resentment at a time when peace and concord were critical. 



When the painting was finally unveiled, however, both Talleyrand and 
Wellington felt honored and satisfied. The work depicts a large hall filled 
with diplomats and politicians from all over Europe. On one side the Duke 
of Wellington enters the room, and all eyes are turned toward him; he is 
the “center” of attention. In the very center of the painting, meanwhile, sits 
Talleyrand. 

Interpretation 

It is often very difficult to satisfy the master, but to satisfy two masters in 
one stroke takes the genius of a great courtier. Such predicaments are com- 
mon in the life of a courtier: By giving attention to one master, he dis¬ 
pleases another. You must find a way to navigate this Scylla and Charybdis 
safely. Masters must receive their due; never inadvertently stir up the re¬ 
sentment of one in pleasing another. 

Scene V 

George Brummell, also known as Beau Brummell, made his mark in the 
late 1700s by the supreme elegance of his appearance, his popularization of 
shoe buckles (soon imitated by all the dandies), and his clever way with 
words. His London house was the fashionable spot in town, and Brummell 
was the authority on all matters of fashion. If he disliked your footwear, 
you immediately got rid of it and bought whatever he was wearing. He per¬ 
fected the art of tying a cravat; Lord Byron was said to spend many a night 
in front of the mirror trying to figure out the secret behind Brummell’s per¬ 
fect knots. 

One of Brummeirs greatest admirers was the Prince of Wales, who 
fancied himself a fashionable young man. Becoming attached to the 
prince’s court (and provided with a royal pension), Brummell was soon so 
sure of his own authority there that he took to joking about the prince’s 
weight, referring to his host as Big Ben. Since trimness of figure was an im¬ 
portant quality for a dandy, this was a withering criticism. At dinner once, 
when the service was slow-, Brummell said to the prince, “Do ring, Big 
Ben ” The prince rang, but when the valet arrived he ordered the man to 
show Brummell the door and never admit him again. 

Despite falling into the prince’s disfavor, Brummell continued to treat 
everyone around him with the same arrogance. Without the Prince of 
Wales’ patronage to support him, he sank into horrible debt, but he main¬ 
tained his insolent manners, and everyone soon abandoned him. He died 
io the most pitiable poverty, alone and deranged. 

Interpretation 

Beau Brummell’s devastating wit was one of the qualities that endeared 
him to the Prince of Wales. But not even he, the arbiter of taste and fashion, 
could get away with a joke about the prince’s appearance, least of all to his 
face. Never joke about a person’s plumpness, even indirectly—and particu¬ 
larly when he is your master. The poorhouses of history are filled with peo¬ 
ple who have made such jokes at their master’s expense. 


CAW 24 i 185 



Scene VI 

Pope Urban VIII wanted to be remembered for his skills in writing poetry, 
which unfortunately were mediocre at best In 1629 Duke Francesco 
d’Este, knowing the pope’s literary pretensions, sent the poet Fulvio Testi 
as his ambassador to the Vatican. One of Testi’s letters to the duke reveals 
why he was chosen: “Once our discussion was over, I kneeled to depart, 
but His Holiness made a signal and walked to another room where he 
sleeps, and after reaching a small table, he grabbed a bundle of papers and 
thus, turning to me with a smiling face, he said: ‘We want Your Lordship to 
listen to some of our compositions.’ And, in fact, he read me two very long 
Pindaric poems, one in praise of the most holy Virgin, and the other one 
about Countess Matilde.” 

We do not know exactly what Test! thought of these very long poems, 
since it would have been dangerous for him to state his opinion freely, 
even in a letter. But he went on to write, “I, following the mood, com¬ 
mented on each line with the needed praise, and, after having kissed His 
Holiness’s foot for such an unusual sign of benevolence [the reading of the 
poetry], I left.” Weeks later, when the duke himself visited the pope, he 
managed to recite entire verses of the pope’s poetry and praised it enough 
to make the pope “so jubilant he seemed to lose his mind.” 

Interpretation 

In matters of taste you can never be too obsequious with your master. Taste 
is one of the ego’s prickliest parts; never impugn or question the master s 
taste—his poetry is sublime, his dress impeccable, and his manner the 
model for all. 

Scene VII 

One afternoon in ancient China, Chao, ruler of Han from 358 to 333 B.C., 
got drunk and fell asleep in the palace gardens. The court crown-keeper, 
whose sole task was to look alter the ruler’s head apparel, passed through 
the gardens and saw his master sleeping without a coat Since it was getting 
cold, the crown-keeper placed his own coat over the ruler, and left. 

When Chao awoke and saw the coat upon him, he asked his atten¬ 
dants, “Who put more clothes on my body?” “The crown-keeper,” they 
replied. The ruler immediately called for his official coat-keeper and had 
him punished for neglecting his duties. He also called for the crown- 
keeper, whom he had beheaded. 

Interpretation 

Do not overstep your bounds. Do what you are assigned to do, to the best 
of your abilities, and never do more. To think that by doing more you are 
doing better is a common blunder. It is never good to seem to be trying too 
hard—it is as if you were covering up some deficiency. Fulfilling a task that 
has not been asked of you just makes people suspicious. If you are a crown- 
keeper, be a crown-keeper. Save your excess energy for when you are not 
in the court. 



Scene VIII 

One day, for amusement, the Italian Renaissance painter Fra Filippo Lippi 
(1406-1469) and some friends went sailing in a small boat off Ancona. 
There they were captured by two Moorish galleys, which hauled them off 
in chains to Barbary, where they were sold as slaves. For eighteen long 
months Filippo toiled with no hope of returning to Italy. 

On several occasions Filippo saw the man who had bought him pass 
by, and one day he decided to sketch this man’s portrait, using burnt 
coal—charcoal—from the fire. Still in his chains, he found a white wall, 
where he drew a full-length likeness of his owner in Moorish clothing. The 
owner soon heard about this, for no one had seen such skill in drawing be¬ 
fore in these parts; it seemed like a miracle, a gift from God. The drawing 
so pleased the owner that he instantly gave Filippo his freedom and em¬ 
ployed him in his court. All the big men on the Barbary coast came to see 
the magnificent color portraits that Fra Filippo then proceeded to do, and 
finally, in gratitude for the honor in this way brought upon him, Filippo’s 
owner returned the artist safely to Italy. 

Interpretation 

We who toil for other people have all in some way been captured by pi¬ 
rates and sold into slavery. But like Fra Filippo {if to a lesser degree), most 
of us possess some gift, some talent, an ability to do something better than 
other people. Make your master a gift of your talents and you will rise 
above other courtiers. Let him take the credit if necessary, it will only be 
temporary: Use him as a stepping stone, a way of displaying your talent 
and eventually buying your freedom from enslavement. 

Scene IX 

Alfonso I of Aragon once had a servant who told the king that the night 
before he had had a dream: Alfonso had given him a gift of weapons, 
horses, and clothes. Alfonso, a generous, lordly man, decided it would be 
amusing to make this dream come true, and promptly gave the servant 
exactly these gifts. 

A little while later, the same servant announced to Alfonso that he had 
had yet another dream, and in this one Alfonso had given him a consider¬ 
able pile of gold florins. The king smiled and said, “Don’t believe in 
dreams from now on; they lie.” 

Interpretation 

In his treatment of the servant’s first dream, Alfonso remained in control. 
By making a dream come true, he claimed a godlike power for himself, if 
in a mild and humorous way. In the second dream, however, all appear¬ 
ance of magic was gone; this was nothing but an ugly con game on the ser¬ 
vant’s part. Never ask for too much, then, and know when to stop. It is the 
master’s prerogative to give—to give when he wants and what he wants, 
and to do so without prompting. Do not give him the chance to reject your 
requests. Better to win favors by deserving them, so that they are bestowed 
without your asking. 



Scene X 

The great English landscape painter J. M. W. Turner (1775-1851) was 
known for his use of color, which he applied with a brilliance and a strange 
iridescence. The color in his paintings was so striking, in fact, that other 
artists never wanted his work hung next to theirs: It inevitably made every¬ 
thing around it seem dull. 

The painter Sir Thomas Lawrence once had the misfortune of seeing 
Turner’s masterpiece Cologne hanging in an exhibition between two works 
of his own. Lawrence complained bitterly to the gallery owner, who gave 
him no satisfaction: After ail, someone’s paintings had to hang next to 
Turner’s. But Turner heard of Lawrence’s complaint, and before the exhibi¬ 
tion opened, he toned down the brilliant golden sky in Cologne, making it as 
dull as the colors in Lawrence’s works. A friend of Turner’s who saw the 
painting approached the artist with a horrified look: “What have you done 
to your picture!” he said. “Well, poor Lawrence was so unhappy,” Turner 
replied, “and it’s only lampblack. It’ll wash off after the exhibition.” 
Interpretation 

Many of a courtier’s anxieties have to do with the master, with whom most 
dangers lie. Yet it is a mistake to imagine that the master is the only one to 
determine your fate. Your equals and subordinates play integral parts also. 
A court is a vast stew of resentments, fears, and powerful envy. You have to 
placate everyone who might someday harm you, deflecting their resent¬ 
ment and envy and diverting their hostility onto other people. 

Turner, eminent courtier, knew that his good fortune and fame de¬ 
pended on his fellow painters as well as on his dealers and patrons. How 
many of the great have been felled by envious colleagues! Better temporar¬ 
ily to dull your brilliance than to suffer the slings and arrows of envy. 

Scene XI 

Winston Churchill was an amateur artist, and after World War II his paint¬ 
ings became collector’s items. The American publisher Henry Luce, in 
fact, creator of Time and Life magazines, kept one of Churchill’s landscapes 
hanging in his private office in New York. 

On a tour through the United States once, Churchill visited Luce in his 
office, and the two men looked at the painting together. The publisher re¬ 
marked, “It’s a good picture, but I think it needs something in the fore¬ 
ground—a sheep, perhaps.” Much to Luce’s horror, Churchill’s secretary 
called the publisher the next day and asked him to have the painting sent 
to England. Luce did so, mortified that he had perhaps offended the former 
prime minister. A few days later, however, the painting was shipped back, 
but slightly altered: a single sheep now grazed peacefully in the fore¬ 
ground. 

Interpretation 

In stature and fame, Churchill stood head and shoulders above Luce, but 
Luce was certainly a man of power, so let us imagine a slight equality be¬ 
tween them. Still, what did Churchill have to fear from an American pub¬ 
lisher? Why bow to the criticism of a dilettante? 



A court—in this case the entire world of diplomats and international 
statesmen, and also of the journalists who court them—is a place of mutual 
dependence. It is unwise to insult or offend the taste of people of power, 
even if they are below or equal to you. If a man like Churchill can swallow 
the criticisms of a man like Luce, he proves himself a courtier without peer. 
(Perhaps his correction of the painting implied a certain condescension as 
well, but he did it so subtly that Luce did not perceive any slight.) Imitate 
Churchill: Put in the sheep. It is always beneficial to play the obliging 
courtier, even when you are not serving a master. 


THE DELICATE GAME OF COURTIERSHIP: A Warning 
Talleyrand was the consummate courtier, especially in serving his master 
Napoleon. When the two men were first getting to know each other, 
Napoleon once said in passing, “I shall come to lunch at your house one of 
these days.” Talleyrand had a house at Auteuil, in the suburbs of Paris. “I 
should be delighted, man general” the minister replied, “and since my 
house is close to the Bois de Boulogne, you will be able to amuse yourself 
with a bit of shooting in the afternoon.” 

“I do not like shooting,” said Napoleon, “But I love hunting. Are there 
any boars in the Bois de Boulogne?” Napoleon came from Corsica, where 
boar hunting was a great sport. By asking if there were boars in a Paris 
park, he showed himself still a provincial, almost a rube. Talleyrand did not 
laugh, however, but he could not resist a practical joke on the man who 
was now his master in politics, although not in blood and nobility, since 
Talleyrand came from an old aristocratic family. To Napoleon’s question, 
then, he simply replied, “Very few, man general, but I dare say you will man¬ 
age to find one.” 

It was arranged that Napoleon would arrive at Talleyrand’s house the 
following day at seven a.m. and would spend the morning there. The “boar 
hunt” would take place in the afternoon. Throughout the morning the ex¬ 
cited general talked nothing but boar hunting. Meanwhile, Talleyrand se¬ 
cretly had his servants go to the market, buy two enormous black pigs, and 
take them to the great park. 

After lunch, the hunters and their hounds set off for the Bois de 
Boulogne. At a secret signal from Talleyrand, the servants loosed one of the 
pigs. “1 see a boar,” Napoleon cried joyfully, jumping onto his horse to give 
chase. Talleyrand stayed behind. It took half an hour of galloping through 
the park before the “boar” was finally captured. At the moment of triumph, 
however, Napoleon was approached by one of his aides, who knew the 
creature could not possibly be a boar, and feared the general would be 
ridiculed once the story got out: “Sir,” he told Napoleon, “you realize of 
course that this is not a boar but a pig.” 

Flying into a rage, Napoleon immediately set off at a gallop for Tal¬ 
leyrand’s house. He realized along the way that he would now be the butt 
of many a joke, and that exploding at Talleyrand would only make him 



more ridiculous; it would be better to make a show of good humor. Still, he 
did not hide his displeasure well 

Talleyrand decided to tiy to soothe the general’s bruised ego. He told 
Napoleon not to go back to Paris yet—he should again go hunting in the 
park. There were many rabbits there, and hunting them had been a fa¬ 
vorite pastime of Louis XVI. Talleyrand even offered to let Napoleon use a 
set of guns that had once belonged to Louis. With much flattery and cajol¬ 
ery, he once again got Napoleon to agree to a hunt. 

The party left for the park in the late afternoon. Along the way, 
Napoleon told Talleyrand, M Pm not Louis XVI, I surely won’t kill even one 
rabbit,” Yet that afternoon, strangely enough, the park was teeming with 
rabbits. Napoleon killed at least fifty of them, and his mood changed from 
anger to satisfaction. At the end of his wild shooting spree, however, the 
same aide approached him and whispered in his ear, “To tell the truth, sir, I 
am beginning to believe these are not wild rabbits. I suspect that rascal Tal¬ 
leyrand has played another joke on us.” (The aide was right: Talleyrand 
had in fact sent his servants back to the market, where they had purchased 
dozens of rabbits and then had released them in the Bois de Boulogne.) 

Napoleon immediately mounted his horse and galloped away, this 
time returning straight to Paris. He later threatened Talleyrand, warned 
him not to tell a soul what had happened; if he became the laughingstock 
of Paris, there would be hell to pay. 

It took months for Napoleon to be able to trust Talleyrand again, and 
he never totally forgave him his humiliation. 

Interpretation 

Courtiers are like magicians; They deceptively play with appearances, 
only letting those around them see what they want them to see. With so 
much deception and manipulation afoot, it is essential to keep people from 
seeing your tricks and glimpsing your sleight of hand. 

Talleyrand was normally the Grand Wizard of Courtiership, and but 
for Napoleon’s aide, he probably would have gotten away completely with 
both pleasing his master and having a joke at the general’s expense. But 
courtiership is a subtle art, and overlooked traps and inadvertent mistakes 
can min your best tricks. Never risk being caught in your maneuvers; 
never let people see your devices. If that happens you instantly pass in peo¬ 
ple’s perceptions from a courtier of great manners to a loathsome rogue. It 
is a delicate game you play; apply the utmost attention to covering your 
tracks, and never let your master unmask you. 



LAW 


25 


RE-CREATE YOURSELF 


JUDGMENT 

Do not accept the roles that society foists on you. 
Re-create yourself by forging a new identity , one that 
commands attention and never bores the audience. Be 
the master of your own image rather than letting others 
define it for you. Incorporate dramatic devices into your 
public gestures and actions—your power will be en¬ 
hanced and your character will seem larger than life. 



The man who intends 
to make his fortune in 
this ancient capital of 
the world /RomeJ must 
be a chameleon suscep¬ 
tible of reflecting the 
colors of the atmo¬ 
sphere that surrounds 
him—a Proteus apt to 
assume every form, 
every shape. He must 
be supple, flexible, 
insinuating, dose, 
inscrutable , often base, 
sometimes sincere, 
sometimes perfidious, 
always concealing a 
part of his knowledge, 
indulging in but one 
tone of voice, patient , 
a perfect master of his 
own countenance, as 
cold as ice when any 
other man would be all 
fire; and if unfortu¬ 
nately he is not religious 
at heart—a very 
common occurrence 
for a soul possessing 
the above requisites — 
he must have religion 
in his mind, that is to 
say, on his face, on his 
lips. In kis manners; he 
must suffer quietly, if 
he be an honest man, 
the necessity of know¬ 
ing himself an arrant 
hypocrite. The man 
whose soul would 
loathe such a life 
should leave Rome and 
seek his fortune else¬ 
where. / do not know 
whether / am praising 
or excusing myself but 
of all those qualities l 
possessed but one — 
namely , flexibility. 

MEMOIRS, 

Giovanni Casanova, 
1725-1798 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I 

Julius Caesar made his first significant mark on Roman society in 65 B.C., 
when he assumed the post of aedile, the official in charge of grain distribu¬ 
tion and public games. He began his entrance into the public eye by orga¬ 
nizing a series of carefully crafted and well-timed spectacles—wild-beast 
hunts, extravagant gladiator shows, theatrical contests. On several occa¬ 
sions, he paid for these spectacles out of his own pocket To the common 
man, Julius Caesar became indelibly associated with these much-loved 
events. As he slowly rose to attain the position of consul, his popularity 
among the masses served as the foundation of his power. He had created 
an image of himself as a great public showman. 

In 49 B.C., Rome was on the brink of a civil war between rival leaders, 
Caesar and Pompey. At the height of the tension, Caesar, an addict of the 
stage, attended a theatrical performance, and afterward, lost in thought, he 
wandered in the darkness back to his camp at the Rubicon, the river that 
divides Italy from Gaul, where he had been campaigning. To march his 
army back into Italy across the Rubicon would mean the beginning of a 
war with Pompey. 

Before his staff Caesar argued both sides, forming the options like an 
actor on stage, a precursor of Hamlet. Finally, to put his soliloquy to an 
end, he pointed to a seemingly innocent apparition at the edge of the 
river—a very tall soldier blasting a call on a trumpet, then going across a 
bridge over the Rubicon—and pronounced, “Let us accept this as a sign 
from the Gods and follow where they beckon, in vengeance on our double- 
dealing enemies. The die is cast.” All of this he spoke portentously and dra¬ 
matically, gesturing toward the river and looking his generals in the eye. 
He knew that these generals were uncertain in their support, but his ora¬ 
tory overwhelmed them with a sense of the drama of the moment, and of 
the need to seize the time. A more prosaic speech would never have had 
the same effect. The generals rallied to his cause; Caesar and his army 
crossed the Rubicon and by the following year had vanquished Pompey, 
making Caesar dictator of Rome. 

In warfare, Caesar always played the leading man with gusto. He was 
as skilled a horseman as any of his soldiers, and took pride in outdoing 
them in feats of bravery and endurance. He entered battle astride the 
strongest mount, so that his soldiers would see him in the thick of battle, 
urging them on, always positioning himself in the center, a godlike symbol 
of power and a model for them to follow. Of all the armies in Rome, Cae¬ 
sar’s was the most devoted and loyal. Mis soldiers, like the common people 
who had attended his entertainments, had come to identify with him and 
with his cause. 

After the defeat of Pompey, the entertainments grew in scale. Nothing 
like them had ever been seen in Rome. The chariot races became more 
spectacular, the gladiator fights more dramatic, as Caesar staged fights to 
the death among the Roman nobility. He organized enormous mock naval 
battles on an artificial lake. Plays were performed in every Roman ward. A 


192 


LAW 25 



giant new theater was built that sloped dramatically down the Tarpeian 
Rock. Crowds from all over the empire flocked to these events, the roads to 
Rome lined with visitors’ tents. And in 45 B.C., timing his entry into the city 
for maximum effect and surprise, Caesar brought Cleopatra back to Rome 
after his Egyptian campaign, and staged even more extravagant public 
spectacles. 

These events were more than devices to divert the masses; they dra¬ 
matically enhanced the public’s sense of Caesar’s character, and made him 
seem larger than life. Caesar was the master of his public image, of which 
he was forever aware. When he appeared before crowds he wore the most 
spectacular purple robes. He would be upstaged by no one. He was notori¬ 
ously vain about his appearance—it was said that one reason he enjoyed 
being honored by the Senate and people was that on these occasions he 
could wear a laurel wreath, hiding his baldness. Caesar was a masterful or¬ 
ator. He knew how to say a lot by saying a little, intuited the moment to 
end a speech for maximum effect. He never failed to incorporate a surprise 
into his public appearances—a startling announcement that would 
heighten their drama. 

Immensely popular among the Roman people, Caesar was hated and 
feared by his rivals. On the ides of March—March 15 — in the year 44 B.C., 
a group of conspirators led by Brutus and Cassius surrounded him in the 
senate and stabbed him to death. Even dying, however, he kept his sense of 
drama. Drawing the top of his gown over his face, he let go of the cloth’s 
lower part so that it draped his legs, allowing him to die covered and de¬ 
cent. According to the Roman historian Suetonius, his final words to his 
old friend Brutus, who was about to deliver a second blow, were in Greek, 
and as if rehearsed for the end of a play: “You too, my child?” 

Interpretation 

The Roman theater was an event for the masses, attended by crowds 
unimaginable today. Packed into enormous auditoriums, the audience 
would be amused by raucous comedy or moved by high tragedy. Theater 
seemed to contain the essence of life, in its concentrated, dramatic form. 
Like a religious ritual, it had a powerful, instant appeal to the common 
man. 

Julius Caesar was perhaps the first public figure to understand the vital 
link between power and theater. This was because of his own obsessive in¬ 
terest in drama. He sublimated this interest by making himself an actor and 
director on the world stage. He said his lines as if they had been scripted; 
he gestured and moved through a crowd with a constant sense of how he 
appeared to his audience. He incorporated surprise into his repertoire, 
building drama into his speeches, staging into his public appearances. His 
gestures were broad enough for the common man to grasp them instantly. 
He became immensely popular. 

Caesar set the ideal for all leaders and people of power. Like him, you 
must learn to enlarge your actions through dramatic techniques such as 


LAW 25 


193 



surprise, suspense, the creation of sympathy, and symbolic identification. 
Also like him, you must be constantly aware of your audience—of what 
will please them and what will bore them. "You must arrange to place your¬ 
self at the center, to command attention, and never to be upstaged at any 
cost. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II 

In the year 1831, a young woman named Aurore Dupin Dudevant left her 
husband and family in the provinces and moved to Paris. She wanted to be 
a writer; marriage, she felt, was worse than prison, for it left her neither the 
time nor the freedom to pursue her passion. In Paris she would establish 
her independence and make her living by writing. 

Soon after Dudevant arrived in the capital, however, she had to con¬ 
front certain harsh realities. To have any degree of freedom in Paris you 
had to have money. For a woman, money could only come through mar¬ 
riage or prostitution. No woman had ever come close to making a living by 
wilting. Women wrote as a hobby, supported by their husbands, or by an 
inheritance. In fact when Dudevant first showed her writing to an editor, 
he told her, “You should make babies, Madame, not literature.” 

Clearly Dudevant had come to Paris to attempt the impossible. In the 
end, though, she came up with a strategy to do what no woman had ever 
done—a strategy to re-create herself completely, forging a public image of 
her own making. Women writers before her had been forced into a ready¬ 
made role, that of the second-rate artist who wrote mostly for other 
women. Dudevant decided that if she had to play a role, she would turn the 
game around: She would play the part of a man. 

In 1832 a publisher accepted Dudevant’s first major novel, Indiana. 
She had chosen to publish it under a pseudonym, "George Sand,” and ail 
of Paris assumed this impressive new writer was male. Dudevant had 
sometimes worn men’s clothes before creating "George Sand” (she had al¬ 
ways found men’s shirts and riding breeches more comfortable); now, as 
a public figure, she exaggerated the image. She added long men’s coats, 
gray hats, heavy boots, and dandyish cravats to her wardrobe. She smoked 
cigars and in conversation expressed herself like a man, unafraid to domi¬ 
nate the conversation or to use a saucy word. 

This strange “male/female” writer fascinated the public. And unlike 
other women writers, Sand found herself accepted into the clique of male 
artists. She drank and smoked with them, even carried on affairs with the 
most famous artists of Europe—Musset, Liszt, Chopin. It was she who did 
the wooing, and also the abandoning—she moved on at her discretion. 

Those who knew Sand well understood that her male persona pro¬ 
tected her from the public’s prying eyes. Out in the world, she enjoyed 
playing the part to the extreme; in private she remained herself. She also 
realized that the character of "George Sand” could grow stale or pre¬ 
dictable, and to avoid this she would every now and then dramatically alter 



the character she had created; instead of conducting affairs with famous 
men, she would begin meddling in politics, leading demonstrations, inspir¬ 
ing student rebellions. No one would dictate to her the limits of the charac¬ 
ter she had created. Long after she died, and after most people had stopped 
reading her novels, the larger-than-life theatricality of that character has 
continued to fascinate and inspire. 

Interpretation 

Throughout Sand’s public life, acquaintances and other artists who spent 
time in her company had the feeling they were in the presence of a man. 
But in her journals and to her closest friends, such as Gustave Flaubert, she 
confessed that she had no desire to be a man, but was playing a part for 
public consumption. What she really wanted was the power to determine 
her own character. She refused the limits her society would have set on her. 
She did not attain her power, however, by being herself; instead she cre¬ 
ated a persona that she could constandy adapt to her own desires, a per¬ 
sona that attracted attention and gave her presence. 

Understand this: The world wants to assign you a role in life. And 
once you accept that role you are doomed. Youx power is limited to the 
tiny amount allotted to the role you have selected or have been forced to 
assume. An actor, on the other hand, plays many roles. Enjoy that protean 
power, and if it is beyond you, at least forge a new identity, one of your 
own making, one that has had no boundaries assigned to it by an envious 
mid resentful world. This act of defiance is Promethean: It makes you re¬ 
sponsible for your own creation. 

Your new identity will protect you from the world precisely because it 
is not “you”; it is a costume you put on and take off. You need not take it 
personally. And your new identity sets you apart, gives you theatrical pres¬ 
ence. Those in the back rows can see you and hear you. Those in the front 
rows marvel at your audacity. 

Do not people talk in society of a man being a great actor? They do not mean by 
that that he feds , but that he excels in simulating , though he feels nothing . 

Denis Diderot, 1713—1781 


KEYS TO POWER 

The character you seem to have been bom with is not necessarily who you 
are; beyond the characteristics you have inherited, your parents, your 
friends, and your peers have helped to shape your personality The 
Promethean task of the powerful is to take control of the process, to stop al¬ 
lowing others that ability to limit and mold them. Remake yourself into a 
character of power. Working on yourself like clay should be one of your 
greatest and most pleasurable life tasks. It makes you in essence an artist— 
an artist creating yourself. 

In fact, the idea of self-creation comes from the world of art. For thou- 



sands of years, only kings and the highest courtiers had the freedom to 
shape their public image and determine their own identity. Similarly, only 
kings and the wealthiest lords could contemplate their own image in art, 
and consciously alter it. The rest of mankind played the limited role that 
society demanded of them, and had little self-consciousness, 

A shift in this condition can be detected in Velazquez’s painting Las 
Meninas, made in 1656, The artist appears at the left of the canvas, standing 
before a painting that he is in the process of creating, but that has its back 
to us—we cannot see it Beside him stands a princess, her attendants, and 
one of the court dwarves, all watching him work. The people posing for the 
painting are not directly visible, but we can see them in tiny reflections in a 
mirror on the back wall—the king and queen of Spain, who must be sitting 
somewhere in the foreground, outside the picture. 

The painting represents a dramatic change in the dynamics of power 
and the ability to determine one’s own position in society. For Velazquez, 
the artist, is far more prominently positioned than the king and queen. In a 
sense he is more powerful than they are, since he is clearly the one control¬ 
ling the image —their image. Velazquez no longer saw himself as the slav¬ 
ish, dependent artist. He had remade himself into a man of power. And 
indeed the first people other than aristocrats to play openly with their 
image in Western society were artists and writers, and later on dandies and 
bohemians. Today the concept of self-creation has slowly filtered down to 
the rest of society, and has become an ideal to aspire to. Like Velazquez, 
you must demand for yourself the power to determine your position in the 
painting, and to create your own image. 

The first step in the process of self-creation is self-consciousness— 
being aware of yourself as an actor and taking control of your appearance 
and emotions. As Diderot said, the bad actor is the one who is always sin¬ 
cere. People who wear their hearts on their sleeves out in society are tire¬ 
some and embarrassing. Their sincerity notwithstanding, it is hard to take 
them seriously. Those who cry in public may temporarily elicit sympathy, 
but sympathy soon turns to scorn and irritation at their self¬ 
obsessiveness—they are crying to get attention, we feel, and a malicious 
part of us wants to deny them the satisfaction. 

Good actors control themselves better. They can play sincere and 
heartfelt, can affect a tear and a compassionate look at will, but they don’t 
have to feel it They externalize emotion in a form that others can under¬ 
stand. Method acting is fatal in the real world. No ruler or leader could 
possibly play the part if all of the emotions he showed had to be real. So 
learn self-control. Adopt the plasticity of the actor, who can mold his or her 
face to the emotion required. 

The second step in the process of self-creation is a variation on the 
George Sand strategy: the creation of a memorable character, one that 
compels attention, that stands out above the other players on the stage, 
This was the game Abraham Lincoln played. The homespun, common 
country man, he knew, was a kind of president that America had never had 



but would delight in electing. Although many of these qualities came natu¬ 
rally to him, he played them up—the hat and clothes, the beard. (No presi¬ 
dent before him had worn a beard.) Lincoln was also the first president to 
use photographs to spread his image, helping to create the icon of the 
“homespun president” 

Good drama, however, needs more than an interesting appearance, or 
a single stand-out moment. Drama takes place over time—it is an unfold¬ 
ing event Rhythm and timing are critical. One of the most important ele¬ 
ments in the rhythm of drama is suspense. Houdini for instance, could 
sometimes complete his escape acts in seconds—but he drew them out to 
minutes, to make the audience sweat. 

The key to keeping the audience on the edge of their seats is letting 
events unfold slowly, then speeding them up at the right moment, accord¬ 
ing to a pattern and tempo that you control. Great rulers from Napoleon to 
Mao Tse-tung have used theatrical timing to surprise and divert their pub¬ 
lic. Franklin Delano Roosevelt understood the importance of staging politi¬ 
cal events in a particular order and rhythm. 

At the time of his 1932 presidential election, the United States was in 
the midst of a dire economic crisis. Banks were failing at an alarming rate. 
Shortly after winning the election, Roosevelt went into a kind of retreat. 
He said nothing about his plans or his cabinet appointments. He even re¬ 
fused to meet the sitting president, Herbert Hoover, to discuss the transi¬ 
tion. By the time of Roosevelt’s inauguration the country was in a state of 
high anxiety. 

In his inaugural address, Roosevelt shifted gears. He made a powerful 
speech, making it clear that he intended to lead the country in a completely 
new direction, sweeping away the timid gestures of his predecessors. From 
then on the pace of his speeches and public decisions—cabinet appoint¬ 
ments, bold legislation—unfolded at an incredibly rapid rate. The period 
after the inauguration became known as the “Hundred Days,” and its suc¬ 
cess in altering the country’s mood partly stemmed from Roosevelt’s clever 
pacing and use of dramatic contrast. He held his audience in suspense, 
then hit them with a series of bold gestures that seemed all the more mo¬ 
mentous because they came from nowhere. You must learn to orchestrate 
events in a similar manner, never revealing all your cards at once, but un¬ 
folding them in a way that heightens their dramatic effect. 

Besides covering a multitude of sins, good drama can also confuse and 
deceive your enemy. During World War II, the German playwright Bertolt 
Brecht worked in Hollywood as a screenwriter. After the war he was called 
before the House Committee on Un-American Activities for his supposed 
Communist sympathies. Other writers who had been called to testify 
planned to humiliate the committee members with an angry emotional 
stand. Brecht was wiser: He would play the committee like a violin, charm¬ 
ing them while fooling them as well. He carefully rehearsed his responses, 
and brought along some props, notably a cigar on which he puffed away, 
knowing the head of the committee liked cigars. And indeed he proceeded 



to beguile the committee with well-crafted responses that were ambiguous, 
funny, and double-edged. Instead of an angry, heartfelt tirade, he ran cir¬ 
cles around them with a staged production, and they let him off scot-free. 

Other dramatic effects for your repertoire include the beau geste, an 
action at a climactic moment that symbolizes your triumph or your bold¬ 
ness. Caesar’s dramatic crossing of the Rubicon was a beau geste —a move 
that dazzled the soldiers and gave him heroic proportions. You must also 
appreciate the importance of stage entrances and exits. When Cleopatra 
first met Caesar in Egypt, she arrived rolled up in a carpet, which she 
arranged to have unfurled at his feet. George Washington twice left power 
with flourish and fanfare (first as a general, then as a president who refused 
to sit for a third term), showing he knew how to make the moment count, 
dramatically and symbolically. Your own entrances and exits should be 
crafted and planned as carefully. 

Remember that overacting can be counterproductive—it is another 
way of spending too much effort trying to attract attention. The actor 
Richard Burton discovered early in his career that by standing totally still 
onstage, he drew attention to himself and away from the other actors. It is 
less what you do that matters, clearly, than how you do it—your graceful¬ 
ness and imposing stillness on the social stage count for more than overdo¬ 
ing your part and moving around too much. 

Finally: Learn to play many roles, to be whatever the moment re¬ 
quires. Adapt your mask to the situation—be protean in the faces you wear. 
Bismarck played this game to perfection: To a liberal he was a liberal, to a 
hawk he was a hawk. He could not be grasped, and what cannot be 
grasped cannot be consumed. 


Image: 

The Greek Sea-God Proteus. 

His power came from his ability to 
change shape at will, to be whatever the 
moment required. When Menelaus, brother 
of Agamemnon, tried to seize him, Proteus 
transformed himself into a lion, then a serpent, a 
panther, a boar, running water, and finally a leafy tree. 


Authority: Know how to be all things to all men. A discreet Proteus—a 
scholar among scholars, a saint among saints. That is the art of winning over 
everyone, for like attracts like. Take note of temperaments and adapt your¬ 
self to that of each person you meet—follow the lead of the serious and 
jovial in turn, changing your mood discreetly. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658) 



REVERSAL 

There can really be no reversal to this critical law; Rad theater is bad the¬ 
ater. Even appearing natural requires art—in other words, acting. Bad act¬ 
ing only creates embarrassment. Of course you should not be too 
dramatic—avoid the histrionic gesture. But that is simply bad theater any¬ 
way, since it violates centuries-old dramatic laws against overacting. In 
essence there is no reversal to this law. 



LAW 


26 


KEEP YOUR HANDS CLEAN 


JUDGMENT 

You must seem a paragon of civility and efficiency: 
Your hands are never soiled by mistakes and nasty 
deeds . Maintain such a spotless appearance by using 
others as scapegoats and cat's-paws to disguise your 
involvement 



PART I: CONCEAL YOUR MISTAKES— 

HAVE A SCAPEGOAT AROUND TO TAKE THE BLAME 

Our good name and reputation depend more on what we conceal than on 
what we reveal Everyone makes mistakes, but those who are truly clever 
manage to hide them, and to make sure someone else is blamed. A conve¬ 
nient scapegoat should always be kept around for such moments. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 1 

Near the end of the second century A.D., as China’s mighty Han Empire 
slowly collapsed, the great general and imperial minister Ts’ao Ts’ao 
emerged as the most powerful man in the country. Seeking to extend his 
power base and to rid himself of the last of his rivals, Ts’ao Ts’ao began a 
campaign to take control of the strategically vital Central Plain. During the 
siege of a key city, he slightly miscalculated the timing for supplies of grain 
to arrive from the capital. As he waited for the shipment to come in, the 
army ran low on food, and Ts’ao Ts’ao was forced to order die chief of 
commissariat to reduce its rations. 

Ts’ao Ts’ao kept a tight rein on the army, and ran a network of inform- 
ers. His spies soon reported that the men were complaining, grumbling 
that he was living well while they themselves had barely enough to eat. 
Perhaps Ts’ao Ts’ao was keeping the food for himself, they murmured. If 
the grumbling spread, Ts’ao Ts’ao could have a mutiny on his hands. He 
summoned the chief of commissariat to his tent 

"I want to ask you to lend me something, and you must not refuse,” 
Ts’ao Ts’ao told die chief. “What is it?” the chief replied. “I want the loan of 
your head to show to the troops,” said Ts’ao Ts’ao. "But I’ve done nothing 
wrong!” cried the chief. “I know,” said Ts’ao Ts’ao with a sigh, "but if I do 
not put you to death, there will be a mutiny Do not grieve—after you’re 
gone, I’ll look after your family.” Put this way, the request left the chief no 
choice, so he resigned himself to his fate and was beheaded that very day 
Seeing his head on public display, the soldiers stopped grumbling. Some 
saw through Ts’ao Ts’ao’s gesture, but kept quiet, stunned and intimidated 
by his violence. And most accepted his version of who was to blame, pre¬ 
ferring to believe in his wisdom and fairness than in his incompetence and 
cruelty. 


CIIEI.M NOTICE 

A great calamity befell 
the town of Chelm one 
day, The town cobbler 
murdered one of his 
customers. So he was 
brought before the 
judge , who sentenced 
him to die by hanging. 
When ihe verdict 
read a townsman arose 
and cried out. “If your 
Honor pleases—you 
have sentenced to death 
the town cobbler / He's 
the only one we've got. 
if you hang him who 
will mend our shoes?" 
“Who? Who? " cried all 
the people of Chelm 
with one voice. 

The judge nodded in 
agreement and recon¬ 
sidered his verdict. 
“Good people of 
Chelm,"he said , “what 
you say is true. Since 
we have only one cob¬ 
bler it would be a great 
wrong against the com¬ 
munity to lei him die. 
As there are two 
roofers in the town let 
one of them be hanged 
instead ." 


Interpretation 

Ts’ao Ts’ao came to power in an extremely tumultuous time. In the struggle 
for supremacy in the crumbling Han Empire, enemies had emerged from 
all sides. The battle for the Central Plain had proven more difficult than he 
imagined, and money and provisions were a constant concern. No wonder 
that under such stress, he had forgotten to order supplies in time. 

Once it became clear that the delay was a critical mistake, and that the 
army was seething with mutiny, Ts’ao Ts’ao had two options: apology and 
excuses, or a scapegoat. Understanding the workings of power and the im~ 


A TREASURY OF JEWISH 
FOLKLORE, 

Nathan Ausubel, ed., 
1948 


LAW 2ti 


20J 



portance of appearances as he did, Ts’ao Ts’ao did not hesitate for a mo¬ 
ment: He shopped around for the most convenient head and had it served 
up immediately. 

Occasional mistakes are inevitable—the world is just too unpre¬ 
dictable. People of power, however, are undone not by the mistakes they 
make, but by the way they deal with them. Like surgeons, they must cut 
away the tumor with speed and finality. Excuses and apologies are much 
too blunt tools for this delicate operation; the powerful avoid them. By 
apologizing you open up all sorts of doubts about your competence, your 
intentions, any other mistakes you may not have confessed. Excuses satisfy 
no one and apologies make everyone uncomfortable. The mistake does 
not vanish with an apology; it deepens and festers. Better to cut it off in¬ 
stantly, distract attention from yourself, and focus attention on a conve¬ 
nient scapegoat before people have time to ponder your responsibility or 
your possible incompetence. 

/ would rather betray the whole world than let the world betray me. 

General Ts’ao Ts’ao , c. a.ij. 155-220 

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II 

For several years Cesare Borgia campaigned to gain control of large parts 
of Italy in the name of his father, Pope Alexander. In the year 1500 he 
managed to take Romagna, in northern Italy. The region had for years 
been ruled by a series of greedy masters who had plundered its wealth for 
themselves. Without police or any disciplining force, it had descended into 
lawlessness, whole areas being ruled by robbers and feuding families. 
To establish order, Cesare appointed a lieutenant general of the region— 
Remirro de Oreo, “a cruel and vigorous man,” according to Niccolo 
Machiavelli. Cesare gave de Oreo absolute powers. 

With energy and violence, de Oreo established a severe, brutal justice 
in Romagna, and soon rid it of almost all of its lawless elements. But in his 
zeal he sometimes went too far, and after a couple of years the local popu¬ 
lation resented and even hated him. In December of 1502, Cesare took de¬ 
cisive action. He first let it be known that he had not approved of de Oreo’s 
cruel and violent deeds, which stemmed from the lieutenant’s brutal na¬ 
ture. Then, on December 22, he imprisoned de Oreo in the town of Ce- 
sena, and the day after Christmas the townspeople awoke to find a strange 
spectacle in the middle of the piazza: de Oreo’s headless body, dressed in a 
lavish suit with a purple cape, the head impaled beside it on a pike, the 
bloody knife and executioner’s block laid out beside the head. As Machi¬ 
avelli concluded his comments on the affair, “The ferocity of this scene left 
the people at once stunned and satisfied.” 

Interpretation 

Cesare Borgia was a master player in the game of power. Always planning 
several moves ahead, he set his opponents the cleverest traps. For this 
Machiavelli honored him above all others in The Prince. 


202 LAW 26 



Gesare foresaw the future with amazing clarity in Romagna: Only bru¬ 
tal justice would bring order to the region. The process would take several 
years, and at first the people would welcome it. But it would soon make 
many enemies, and the citizens would come to resent the imposition of 
such unforgiving justice, especially by outsiders. Cesare himself, then, 
could not be seen as the agent of this justice—the people’s hatred would 
cause too many problems in the future. And so he chose the one man who 
could do the dirty work, knowing in advance that once the task was done 
he would have to display de Oreo’s head on a pike. The scapegoat in this 
case had been planned from the beginning. 

With Ts’ao Ts’ao, the scapegoat was an entirely innocent man; in the 
Romagna, he was die offensive weapon in Cesare’s arsenal that let him get 
the dirty work done without bloodying his own hands. With this second 
kind of scapegoat it is wise to separate yourself from the hatchet man at 
some point, either leaving him dangling in the wind or, like Cesare, even 
making yourself the one to bring him to justice. Not only are you free of in¬ 
volvement in the problem, you can appear as the one who cleaned it up. 

The Athenians regularly maintained a number of degraded and useless 
beings at the public expense; and when any calamity, such as plague, 
drought , or famine, befell the city , . . [these scapegoats] were led about . . . 
and then sacrificed , apparently by being stoned outside the city. 

The Golden Bough. Sir James George Frazer, 1854—1941 


KEYS TO POWER 

The use of scapegoats is as old as civilization itself, and examples of it can 
be found in cultures around the world. The main idea behind these sacri¬ 
fices is the shifting of guilt and sin to an outside figure—object, animal, or 
man—which is then banished or destroyed. The Hebrews used to take a 
live goat (hence the term “scapegoat”) upon whose head the priest would 
lay both hands while confessing the sins of the Children of Israel. Having 
thus had those sins transferred to it, the beast would be led away and aban¬ 
doned in the wilderness. With the Athenians and the Aztecs, the scapegoat 
was human, often a person fed and raised for the purpose. Since famine 
and plague were thought to be visited on humans by the gods, in punish¬ 
ment for wrongdoing, the people suffered not only from the famine and 
plague themselves but from blame and guilt. They freed themselves of guilt 
by transferring it to an innocent person, whose death was intended to sat¬ 
isfy the divine powers and banish the evil from their midst. 

It is an extremely human response to not look inward after a mistake 
or crime, but rather to look outward and to affix blame and guilt on a con¬ 
venient object. When the plague was ravaging Thebes, Oedipus looked 
everywhere for its cause, everywhere except inside himself and his own sin 
of incest, which had so offended the gods and occasioned the plague. This 
profound need to exteriorize one’s guilt, to project it on another person or 
object, has an immense power, which the clever know how to harness. Sac- 



rifice is a ritual, perhaps the most ancient ritual of all; ritual too is a well- 
spring of power. In the killing of de Oreo, note Cesaxe’s symbolic and ritu¬ 
alistic display of his body. By framing it in this dramatic way he focused 
guilt outward. The citizens of Romagna responded instantly. Because it 
comes so naturally to us to look outward rather than inward, we readily ac¬ 
cept the scapegoat’s guilt. 

The bloody sacrifice of the scapegoat seems a barbaric relic of the 
past, but the practice lives on to this day, if indireedy and symbolically; 
since power depends on appearances, and those in power must seem never 
to make mistakes, the use of scapegoats is as popular as ever. What modem 
leader will take responsibility for his blunders? He searches out others 
to blame, a scapegoat to sacrifice. When Mao Tse-tung’s Cultural Rev¬ 
olution failed miserably, he made no apologies or excuses to the Chinese 
people; instead, like Ts’ao Ts’ao before him, he offered up scapegoats, in¬ 
cluding his own personal secretary and high-ranking member of the Party, 
Ch’en Po-ta. 

Franklin D. Roosevelt had a reputation for honesty and fairness. 
Throughout his career, however, he faced many situations in which being 
the nice guy would have spelled political disaster—yet he could not be 
seen as the agent of any foul play. For twenty years, then, his secretary, 
Louis Howe, played the role de Oreo had. He handled the backroom deals, 
the manipulation of the press, the underhanded campaign maneuvers. And 
whenever a mistake was committed, or a dirty trick contradicting Roo¬ 
sevelt’s carefully crafted image became public, Howe served as the scape¬ 
goat, and never complained. 

Besides conveniently shifting blame, a scapegoat can serve as a warn¬ 
ing to others. In 1631 a plot was hatched to oust France’s Cardinal Riche¬ 
lieu from power, a plot that became known as “The Day of the Dupes.” It 
almost succeeded, since it involved the upper echelons of government, in¬ 
cluding the queen mother. But through luck and his own connivances, 
Richelieu survived. 

One of the key conspirators was a man named Marillac, the keeper of 
the seals. Richelieu could not imprison him without implicating the queen 
mother, an extremely dangerous tactic, so he targeted Marillac’s brother, a 
marshal in the army. This man had no involvement in the plot. Richelieu, 
however, afraid that other conspiracies might be in the air, especially in the 
army, decided to set an example. He tried the brother on trumped-up 
charges and had him executed. In this way he indirectly punished the real 
perpetrator, who had thought himself protected, and warned any future 
conspirators that he would not shrink from sacrificing the innocent to pro¬ 
tect his own power. 

In fact it is often wise to choose the most innocent victim possible as a 
sacrificial goat. Such people will not be powerful enough to fight you, and 
their naive protests may be seen as protesting too much—may be seen, in 
other words, as a sign of their guilt. Be careful, however, not to create a 
martyr. It is important that you remain the victim, the poor leader betrayed 



by the incompetence of those around you. If the scapegoat appears too 
weak and his punishment too cruel, you may end up the victim of your 
own device. Sometimes you should find a more powerful scapegoat—one 
who will elicit less sympathy in the long run. 

In this vein, history has time and again shown the value of using a 
close associate as a scapegoat. This is known as die “fall of the favorite.” 
Most kings had a personal favorite at court, a man whom they singled out, 
sometimes for no apparent reason, and lavished with favors and attention. 
But this court favorite could serve as a convenient scapegoat in case of a 
threat to the king’s reputation. The public would readily believe in the 
scapegoat’s guilt—why would the king sacrifice his favorite unless he were 
guilty? And the other courtiers, resentful of the favorite anyway, would re¬ 
joice at his downfall. The king, meanwhile, would rid himself of a man who 
by that time had probably learned too much about him, perhaps becoming 
arrogant and even disdainful of him. Choosing a close associate as a scape¬ 
goat has the same value as the “fall of the favorite.” You may lose a friend 
or aide, but in the long-term scheme of things, it is more important to hide 
your mistakes than to hold on to someone who one day will probably turn 
against you. Besides, you can always find a new favorite to take his place. 


Image: The Innocent Goat. On 
the Day of Atonement, the high 
priest brings the goat into toe 
temple, places his hands on its 
head, and confesses the peo¬ 
ple’s sins, transferring guilt to 
the guiltless beast, which is 
then led to the wilderness and 
abandoned, the people’s sins 
and blame vanishing with him. 


Authority: Folly consists not in committing Folly, but in being 
incapable of concealing it. All men make mistakes, but the wise 
conceal the blunders they have made, while fools make them pub¬ 
lic. Reputation depends more on what is hidden than on what is 
seen. If you can’t be good, be careful. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658) 



PART II: MAKE USE OF THE CAT’S-PAW 
In thefable , the Monkey grabs the paw of his friend, the Cat, and uses it to 
fish chestnuts out of the fire ; thus getting the nuts he craves , without hurt¬ 
ing himself 

If there is something unpleasant or unpopular that needs to be done, 
it is far too risky for you to do the work yourself You need a cat’s-paw — 
someone who does the dirty, dangerous work for you. The cat'sfaw grabs 
what you need , hurts whom you need hurt, and keeps people from noticing 
that you are the one responsible, Let someone else be the executioner, or the 
bearer of bad news, while you bring only joy and glad tidings . 


Till'. MONKKY AM) 

Till-: CAT 

A monkey and cat, in 
roguery and fun 
Sworn brothers twain, 
both owned a common 
master. 
Whatever mischief in 
the house was done 
By Pug and Tom 
was contrived each 
disaster ..., 
One winter's day was 
seen this hopeful pair 
Close to the kitchen 
fire, as usual , posted. 
Amongst the red-hot 
coals the cook with 
care 

Had plac’d some nice 
plump chestnuts to be 
roasted. 
From whence in smoke 
a pungent odor rose, 
Whose oily fragrance 
struck the monkey's 
nose. 

" Tom!" says sly Pug, 
"pray could not you 
and l 

Share this dessert the 
cook is pleased to 
cater? 

Had / such claws as 
yours, I'd quickly try; 
Lend me a hand—'twill 
be a coup-de-mattre." 
So said, he. seized his 
colleague's ready paw, 
Pulled out the fruit, 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I 

In 59 B.C., the future queen Cleopatra of Egypt, then ten years old, wit¬ 
nessed the overthrow and banishment of her father, Ptolemy XII, at the 
hand of his elder daughters—her own sisters. One of the daughters, 
Berenice, emerged as the leader of the rebellion, and to ensure that she 
would now rule Egypt alone, she imprisoned her other sisters and mur¬ 
dered her own husband. This may have been necessary as a practical step 
to secure her rule. But that a member of the royal family, a queen no less, 
would so overtly exact such violence on her own family horrified her sub¬ 
jects and stirred up powerful opposition. Four years later this opposition 
was able to return Ptolemy to power, and he promptly had Berenice and 
the other elder sisters beheaded. 

In 51 B.C. Ptolemy died, leaving four remaining children as heirs. As 
was the tradition in Egypt, the eldest son, Ptolemy XIII (only ten at the 
time), married the elder sister, Cleopatra (now eighteen), and the couple 
took the throne together as king and queen. None of the four children felt 
satisfied with this; everyone, including Cleopatra, wanted more power. A 
struggle emerged between Cleopatra and Ptolemy, each trying to push the 
other to the side. 

In 48 B.C., with the help of a government faction that feared Cleopa¬ 
tra’s ambitions, Ptolemy was able to force his sister to flee the country, 
leaving himself as sole ruler. In exile, Cleopatra schemed. She wanted to 
rule alone and to restore Egypt to its past glory, a goal she felt none of her 
other siblings could achieve; yet as long as they were alive, she could not 
realize her dream. And the example of Berenice had made it clear that no 
one would serve a queen who was seen murdering her own kind. Even 
Ptolemy XIII had not dared murder Cleopatra, although he knew she 
would plot against him from abroad. 

Within a year after Cleopatra’s banishment, the Roman dictator Julius 
Caesar arrived in Egypt, determined to make the country a Roman colony 
Cleopatra saw her chance: Reentering Egypt in disguise, she traveled hun¬ 
dreds of miles to reach Caesar in Alexandria. Legend has it that she had 


206 LAW 26 



herself smuggled into his presence rolled up inside a carpet, which was 
gracefully unfurled at his feet, revealing the young queen. Cleopatra imme¬ 
diately went to work on the Roman. She appealed to his love of spectacle 
and his interest in Egyptian history, and poured on her feminine charms. 
Caesar soon succumbed and restored Cleopatra to the throne. 

Cleopatra’s siblings seethed—she had outmaneuvered them. Ptolemy 
XIII would not wait to see what happened next: From his palace in 
Alexandria, he summoned a great army to march on the city and attack 
Caesar. In response, Caesar immediately put Ptolemy and the rest of the 
family under house arrest. But Cleopatra’s younger sister Arsinoe escaped 
from the palace and placed herself at the head of the approaching Egyptian 
troops, proclaiming herself queen of Egypt. Now Cleopatra finally saw her 
chance: She convinced Caesar to release Ptolemy from house arrest, under 
the agreement that he would broker a truce. Of course she knew he would 
do the opposite—that he would fight Arsinoe for control of the Egyptian 
army. But this was to Cleopatra’s benefit, for it would divide the royal fam¬ 
ily. Better still, it would give Caesar the chance to defeat and kill her sib¬ 
lings in battle. 

Reinforced by troops from Rome, Caesar swiftly defeated the rebels. 
In the Egyptians’ retreat, Ptolemy drowned in the Nile. Caesar captured 
Arsinoe and had her sent to Rome as a prisoner. He also executed the nu¬ 
merous enemies who had conspired against Cleopatra, and imprisoned 
others who had opposed her. To reinforce her position as uncontested 
queen, Cleopatra now married the only sibling left, Ptolemy XIV—only 
eleven at the time, and the weakest of the lot. Four years later Ptolemy 
mysteriously died, of poison. 

In 41 B.C., Cleopatra employed on a second Roman leader, Marc 
Antony, the same tactics she had used so well on Julius Caesar. After se¬ 
ducing him, she hinted to him that her sister Arsinoe, still a prisoner in 
Rome, had conspired to destroy him. Marc Antony believed her and 
promptly had Arsinoe executed, thereby getting rid of the last of the sib¬ 
lings who had posed such a threat to Cleopatra. 

Interpretation 

Legend has it that Cleopatra succeeded through her seductive charms, but 
in reality her power came from an ability to get people to do her bidding 
without realizing they were being manipulated. Caesar and Antony not 
only rid her of her most dangerous siblings—Ptolemy XIII and Arsinoe— 
they decimated all of her enemies, in both the government and the mili¬ 
tary. The two men became her cat’s-paws. They entered the fire for her, 
did the ugly but necessary work, while shielding her from appearing as the 
destroyer of her "siblings and fellow Egyptians. And in the end, both men 
acquiesced to her desire to rule Egypt not as a Roman colony but as an in¬ 
dependent allied kingdom. And they did all this for her without realizing 
how she had manipulated them. This was persuasion of the subtlest and 
most powerful kind. 


and crammed it in his 
jaw. 

Now came the shining 
Mistress of ih e fane. 
And off in haste the 
two marauders 
scampered. 

Tom for his share of 
the plunder had the 
pain, 

Whilst Pug his palate 
with the dainties 
pampered. 

FABLES, 

Jean de La Fontaine, 
1621-1695 


THE CROW-IIEN. THE 
COBRA. AND THE 
JACKAL 

Once upon a time there 
was a crow and his wife 
who had built a nest in 
a. banyan tree. A big 
snake crawled into the 
hollow trunk and ate 
up the chicks as they 
were hatched. The crow 
did not want to move, 
since he loved the tree 
dearly. So he went to 
his friend the jackal for 
advice. A plan of action 
was devised. The crow 
and his wife flew about 
in implementation. 

As the wife approached 
a pond, she saw the 
women of the king's 
court bathing, with 
pearls, necklaces, gems, 
garments, and a golden 
chain laying on the 
shore. The crow-hen 
seized the golden chain 
in her beak and flew 
toward the banyan tree 
wiih the eunuchs in 
pursuit. When she 
reached the tree, she 
dropped the chain into 
the hole. As the kings ’ 

LAW 26 : 207 



men climbed, the tree 
for the chain, they saw 
the swelling hood of 
(he cobra. So they 
killed the snake with 
their clubs, retrieved 
(he golden chain , and 
went back to the pond. 
And the crow and 
his wife lived happily 
ever after. 

A TALE FROM THE 
PANCHATANTRA, 
FOURTH CENTURA 
RETOLD IN 
THE CRAFT OF POWER, 
R, G. H, SlU. 1979 


A queen must never dirty her hands with ugly tasks, nor can a king ap¬ 
pear in public with blood on his face. Yet power cannot survive without the 
constant squashing of enemies—there will always be dirty little tasks that 
have to be done to keep yon on the throne. Like Cleopatra, you need a 
cat’s-paw. 

This will usually be a person from outside your immediate circle, who 
will therefore be unlikely to realize how he or she is being used. Yon will 
find these dupes everywhere—people who enjoy doing you favors, espe¬ 
cially if you throw them a minimal bone or two in exchange. But as they 
accomplish tasks that may seem to them innocent enough, or at least com¬ 
pletely justified, they are actually clearing the field for you, spreading the 
information you feed them, undermining people they do not realize axe 
your rivals, inadvertently furthering your cause, dirtying their hands while 
yours remain spotless. 


HUW TO 
BROADCAST NF.WS 

When Omar, son of 
al-Khattab, was 
converted to Islam , he 
wanted the news of his 
conversion to reach 
everyone quickly. He 
went w see Jamil, son 
of Ma 'mar al-Jumahi. 

The latter was re¬ 
nowned for the speed 
with which he passed 
on secrets. If he was 
told anything in confi¬ 
dence, he let everyone 
know about it immedi¬ 
ately. Omar said to 
him: ‘7 have become a 
Muslim. Do not say 
anything. Keep it dark. 
Do not mention it in 
from of anyone. ” 
Jamil went out into the 
street and began shout¬ 
ing at the top of his 
voice: “Do you believe 
that Omar, son of al- 
Khattah, has not 
become a Muslim? 
Well, do not believe 
that! / am telling you 
that he has /” 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II 

In die late 1920s, civil war broke out in China as the Nationalist and Com¬ 
munist parties battled for control of the country. In 1927 Chiang Kai-shek, 
the Nationalist leader, vowed to kill every last Communist, and over the 
next few years he nearly accomplished his task, pushing his enemies hard 
until, in 1934-1935, he forced them into the Long March, a six-thousand- 
mile retreat from the southeast to the remote northwest, through harsh ter¬ 
rain, in which most of their ranks were decimated. In late 1936 Chiang 
planned one last offensive to wipe them out, but he was caught in a mutiny: 
His own soldiers captured him and turned him over to the Communists. 
Now he could only expect the worst 

Meanwhile, however, die Japanese began an invasion of China, and 
much to Chiang’s surprise, instead of killing him the Communist leader, 
Mao Tse-tung, proposed a deal: The Communists would let him go, and 
would recognize him as commander of their forces as well as his, if he 
would agree to fight alongside them against their common enemy. Chiang 
had expected torture and execution; now he could not believe his luck. 
How soft these Reds had become. Without having to fight a rearguard ac¬ 
tion against the Communists, he knew he could beat the Japanese, and 
then a few years down the line he would turn around and destroy the Reds 
with ease. He had nothing to lose and everything to gain by agreeing to 
their terms. 

The Communists proceeded to fight the Japanese in their usual fash¬ 
ion, with hit-and-run guerrilla tactics, while the Nationalists fought a more 
conventional war. Together, after several years, they succeeded in evicting 
the Japanese. Now, however, Chiang finally understood what Mao had re¬ 
ally planned. His own army had met the brunt of the Japanese artillery, 
was greatly weakened, and would take a few years to recover. The Com¬ 
munists, meanwhile, had not only avoided any direct hits from the Japa¬ 
nese, they had used the time to recoup their strength, and to spread out 


208 


LAW 26 




and gain pockets of influence all over China. As soon as the war against the 
Japanese ended, the civil war started again—but this time the Communists 
enveloped the weakened Nationalists and slowly beat them into submis¬ 
sion. The Japanese had served as Mao’s cat’s-paw, inadvertently ploughing 
the fields for the Communists and making possible their victory over Chi- 
ang Kai-shek. 

Interpretation 

Most leaders who had taken as powerful an enemy as Chiang Kai-shek 
prisoner would have made sure to kill him. But in doing so they would 
have lost the chance Mao exploited. Without the experienced Chiang as 
leader of the Nationalists, the fight to drive the Japanese out might have 
lasted much longer, with devastating results. Mao was far too clever to let 
anger spoil the chance to kill two birds with one stone. In essence, Mao 
used two cat’s-paws to help him attain total victory. First, he cleverly baited 
Chiang into taking charge of the war against the Japanese. Mao knew the 
Nationalists led by Chiang would do most of the hard fighting and would 
succeed in pushing the Japanese out of China, if they did not have to con¬ 
cern themselves with fighting the Communists at the same time. The Na¬ 
tionalists, then, were the first cat’s-paw, used to evict the Japanese. But 
Mao also knew that in the process of leading the war against the invaders, 
the Japanese artillery and air support would decimate the conventional 
forces of the Nationalists, doing damage it could take the Communists 
decades to inflict. Why waste time and lives if the Japanese could do the 
job quickly? It was this wise policy of using one cat’s-paw after another that 
allowed the Communists to prevail. 

There are two uses of the cat’s-paw; to save appearances, as Cleopatra 
did, and to save energy and effort. The latter case in particular demands 
that you plan several moves in advance, realizing that a temporary move 
backward (letting Chiang go, say) can lead to a giant leap forward. If you 
are temporarily weakened and need time to recover, it will often serve you 
well to use those around you both as a screen to hide your intentions and 
as a cat’s-paw to do your work for you. Look for a powerful third party who 
shares an enemy with you (if for different reasons), then take advantage of 
their superior power to deal blows which would have cost you much more 
energy, since you are weaker. You can even gently guide them into hostili¬ 
ties. Always search out the overly aggressive as potential cat’s-paws—they 
are often more than willing to get into a fight, and you can choose just the 
right fight for your purposes. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW III 

Kuriyama Daizen was an adept of Cha-no-yu (Hot Water for Tea, the 
Japanese tea ceremony) and a student of the teachings of the great tea mas¬ 
ter Sen no Rikyu. Around 1620 Daizen learned that a friend of his, 
Hoshino Soemon, had borrowed a large sum of money (300 ryo) to help a 


The news of Omar's 
conversion to Islam 
was spread everywhere. 
And that was just what 
he intended. 

THE SUBTLE RUSE: 

THE BOOK OF ARABIC 
WISDOM AND GUILE, 

THi RTEE NTH CHN TURY 


A FOOL AND A WISE MAN 

A wise man , 
walking alone, 

Wii.v being bothered by 
a fool throwing stones 
at his head. 

Turning to face him , 
he said: 

“My dear chap, well 
thrown! 

Please accept these 
few francs. 

You’ve worked hard 
enough to get more 
than mere thanks. 

Every effort deserves 
its reward. 

But see that man over 
there? He can afford 
More than / can. 
Present him with some 
of your stones: they’ll 
earn a good wage. ” 
Lured by the bait, 
the stupid man 
Ran off to repeat 
the outrage 
On the other worthy 
citizen. 

This time he wasn't 
paid in money 
for his stones. 

Up rushed 
serving-men, 

And seized him and 
thrashed him and 
broke all his bones . 

In the courts of kings 
there are pests like this, 
de void of sense: 

They’ll make their 


LAW 26 


209 



master laugh at your 
expense. 
To silence their cackle, 
should you hand out 
rough 

Punishment? Maybe 
you 're not strong 
enough. 
Better persuade them 
to attack 
Somebody else , who 
can more than pay 
them hack. 

SELECTED FABLES. 

Jean df; La Pontajne, 
1621-1695 


I MK WOWS BIRD 

A merchant kept a bird 
in a cage. He was going 
to India, the land from 
which the bird came, 
and asked it whether he 
could bring anything 
back for it. The bird 
asked for its freedom, 
but was refused. So he 
asked the merchant to 
visit a jungle in India 
and announce his 
captivity to the free 
birds who were there. 
The merchant did so, 
and no sooner had he 
spoken when a wild 
bird, just like his own , 
fell senseless out of a 
tree on to the ground. 
The merchant thought 
that this must be a rela¬ 
tive of his own bird , 
and felt sad that he 
should have caused this 
death. 

When he. got home, the 
bird asked him whether 
he had brought good 
news from India. 

"No."said the 
merchant , '7 fear that 
my news is bad. One of 


relative who had fallen into debt But although Soemon had managed to 
bail out his relative, he had simply displaced the burden onto himself 
Daizen knew Soemon well—he neither cared nor understood much about 
money, and could easily get into trouble through slowness in repaying the 
loan, which had been made by a wealthy merchant called Kawachiya 
Sanemon, Yet if Daizen offered to help Soemon pay back the loan, he 
would refuse, out of pride, and might even be offended. 

One day Daizen visited his friend, and after touring the garden and 
looking at Soemon’s prized peonies, they retired to his reception room. 
Here Daizen saw a painting by the master Kano Tennyu. “Ah,” Daizen ex¬ 
claimed, “a splendid piece of painting.... I don’t know when I have seen 
anything 1 like better.” After several more bouts of praise, Soemon had no 
choice: “Well,” he said, “since you like it so much, I hope you will do me 
the favor of accepting it.” 

At first Daizen refused, but when Soemon insisted he gave in. The 
next day Soemon in turn received a package from Daizen. Inside it was a 
beautiful and delicate vase, which Daizen, in an accompanying note, asked 
his friend to accept as a token of his appreciation for the painting that Soe¬ 
mon had so graciously given him the day before. He explained that the 
vase had been made by Sen no Rikyu himself, and bore an inscription 
from Emperor Hideyoshi. If Soemon did not care for the vase, Daizen sug¬ 
gested, he might make a gift of it to an adherent of Cha-no-yu—perhaps 
the merchant Kawachiya Sanemon, who had often expressed a desire to 
possess it “I hear,” Daizen continued, “he has a fine piece of fancy paper 
[tlxe 300-ryo I.O.U.j which you would much like. It is possible you might 
arrange an exchange.” 

Realizing what his gracious friend was up to, Soemon took the vase to 
the wealthy lender. “However did you get this,” exclaimed Sanemon, 
when Soemon showed him the vase. “I have often heard of it, but this is the 
first time I have ever seen it It is such a treasure that it is never allowed 
outside the gate!” He instantly offered to exchange the debt note for the 
flower vase, and to give Soemon 300 ryo more on top of it. But Soemon, 
who did not care for money, only wanted the debt note back, and 
Sanemon gladly gave it to him. Then Soemon immediately hurried to 
Daizen's house to thank him for his clever support. 

Interpretation 

Kuriyama Daizen understood that the granting of a favor is never simple: 
If it is done with fuss and obviousness, its receiver feels burdened by an 
obligation. This may give the doer a certain power, but it is a power that 
will eventually self-destruct, for it will stir up resentment and resistance. A 
favor done indirectly and elegantly has ten times more power. Daizen 
knew a direct approach would only have offended Soemon. By letting his 
friend give him the painting, however, he made Soemon feel that he too 
had pleased his friend with a gift. In the end, all three parties emerged from 
the encounter feeling fulfilled in their own way. 


210 


LAW 26 



In essence, Daizen made himself the cat’s-paw, the tool to take the 
chestnuts out of the fire. He must have felt some pain in losing the vase, but 
he gained not only the painting but, more important, the power of the 
courtier. The courtier uses his gloved hand to soften any blows against him, 
disguise his scars, and make the act of rescue more elegant and clean. By 
helping others, the courtier eventually helps himself, Daizen’s example 
provides the paradigm for every favor done between friends and peers: 
never impose your favors. Search out ways to make yourself the cat’s-paw, 
indirectly extricating your friends from distress without imposing yourself 
or making them feel obligated to you. 

One, should not be too straightforward. Go and see the forest . 

The straight trees are cut down , the crooked ones are left standing. 

Kautilya, Indian philosopher, third century B.C. 


KEYS TO POWER 

As a leader you may imagine that constant diligence, and the appearance 
of working harder than anyone else, signify power. Actually, though, they 
have the opposite effect: They imply weakness. Why are you working so 
hard? Perhaps you are incompetent, and have to put in extra effort just to 
keep up; perhaps you are one of those people who does not know how to 
delegate, and has to meddle in everything. The truly powerful, on the other 
hand, seem never to be in a hurry or overburdened. While others work 
their fingers to the bone, they take their leisure. They know how to find the 
right people to put in the effort while they save their energy and keep their 
hands out of the fire. Similarly, you may believe that by taking on the dirty 
work yourself, involving yourself directly in unpleasant actions, you im¬ 
pose your power and instill fear. In fact you make yourself look ugly, and 
abusive of your high position. Truly powerful people keep their hands 
dean. Only good things surround them, and the only announcements they 
make are of glorious achievements. 

You will often find it necessary, of course, to expend energy, or to ef¬ 
fect an evil but necessary action. But you must never appear to be this ac¬ 
tion’s agent. Find a cat’s-paw. Develop the arts of finding, using, and, in 
time, getting rid of these people when their cat’s-paw role has been ful¬ 
filled. 

On the eve of an important river battle, the great third-century Chi¬ 
nese strategist Chuko Liang found himself falsely accused of secretly work¬ 
ing for the other side. As proof of his loyalty, his commander ordered him 
to produce 100,000 arrows for the army within three days, or be put to 
death. Instead of trying to manufacture the arrows, an impossible task, 
Liang took a dozen boats and had bundles of straw lashed to their sides. In 
the late afternoon, when mist always blanketed the river, he floated the 
boats toward the enemy camp. Fearing a trap from the wily Chuko Liang, 
the enemy did not attack the barely visible boats with boats of their own. 


your relations 
collapsed and fell at my 
feet when / mentioned 
your captivity." 

As soon as these words 
were spoken the 
merchant's bird 
collapsed and fell to 
the bottom of the cage. 

“ The news of his kins¬ 
man '.v death has killed 
him, too,”thought the 
merchant. Sorrowfully 
he picked up the bird 
and put it on the 
windowsill At once 
the bird revived and 
flew to a nearby tree. 

Now you know, ’* the 
bird said, “that what 
you thought was disas¬ 
ter was in fact good 
news for me. And him 
the message, the 
suggestion of how to 
behave in order to free 
myself, was transmitted 
to me through you. my 
captor/’ And he flew 
away, free at last. 

TALES Of THE 
DERVISHES, 

Tories Shah, 1967 


LAW 2 6 211 



I>AV1D AND BATl ISHKBA 

At the turn of the year, 
when kings take the 
field, David sent Joab 
out with his other offi¬ 
cers and all the Israelite 
forces, and they 
ravaged Ammon and 
laid siege to Rabhah , 
while David remained 
in Jerusalem. One 
evening David got up 
from his couch and, as 
he walked about on the 
roof of the palat e, he 
saw from there a 
woman bathing and 
she was very beautiful 
He sent to inquire who 
she was, and the answer 
came, “It must be 
Bathsheba, daughter of 
Eliam and wi fe of 
Uriah the Hittite. 
David wrote a letter to 
Joab and sent Uriah 
with it. He wrote in the 
tetter: “Pin Uriah 
opposite the enemy 
where the fighting is 
fiercest and then fait 
back, and leave him to 
meet his death. ”... 
Joab ... stationed 
Uriah at a point where 
he knew they would 
put up a stout fight. The 
men of the city sallied 
out and engaged Joab, 
and some o f David's 
guards fell; Uriah the 
Hittite w^ v also killed. 
Joab sent David a 
dispatch with all the 
news of the battle.... 
When Uriah ’v wife 
heard that her husband 
was dead, she mourned 
for him; and when the. 
period of mourning 
was over ; David sent 
for her and brought her 
into his house. She 
became his wife and 
bore him a son. 

OLD TESTAMENT. 

2 SAMUH.L, 11-12 


but showered them with arrows from the bank. As Liang’s boats inched 
closer, they redoubled the rain of arrows, which stuck in the thick straw. 
After several hours, the men hiding on board sailed the vessels quickly 
downstream, where Chuko liang met them and collected his 100,000 
arrows. 

Chuko Liang would never do work that others could do for him—he 
was always thinking up tricks like this one. The key to planning such a 
strategy is the ability to think far ahead, to imagine ways in which other 
people can be baited into doing the job for you. 

An essential element in making this strategy work is to disguise your 
goal, shrouding it in mystery, like the strange enemy boats appearing 
dimly in the mist When your rivals cannot be sure what you su e after, they 
will react in ways that often work against them in the long run. In fact they 
will become your cat’s-paws. If you disguise your intentions, it is much eas¬ 
ier to guide them into moves that accomplish exactly what you want done, 
but prefer not to do yourself. This may require planning several moves in 
advance, like a billiard ball that bounces off the sides a few times before 
heading into the right pocket 

The early-twentieth-century American con artist Yellow Kid Weil 
knew that no matter how skillfully he homed in on the perfect wealthy 
sucker, if he, a stranger, approached this man directly, the sucker might be¬ 
come suspicious. So Weil would find someone the sucker already knew to 
serve as a cat’s-paw—someone lower on the totem pole who was himself 
an unlikely target, and would therefore be less suspicious. Weil would in¬ 
terest this man in a scheme promising incredible wealth. Convinced the 
scheme was for real, the cat’s-paw would often suggest, without prompting, 
that his boss or wealthy friend should get involved: Having more cash to 
invest, this man would increase the size of the pot, making bigger bucks for 
all concerned. The cat’s-paw would then involve the wealthy sucker who 
had been Weil’s target all along, but who would not suspect a trap, since it 
was his trusty subordinate who had roped him in. Devices like this are 
often the best way to approach a person of power: Use an associate or sub¬ 
ordinate to hook you up with your primary target. The cat’s-paw estab¬ 
lishes your credibility and shields you from the unsavory appearance of 
being too pushy in your courtship. 

The easiest and most effective way to use a cat’s-paw is often to plant 
information with him that he will then spread to your primary target False 
or planted information is a powerful tool, especially if spread by a dupe 
whom no one suspects. You will find it very easy to play innocent and dis¬ 
guise yourself as the source. 

The strategic therapist Dr. Milton H. Erickson would often encounter 
among his patients a married couple in which the wife wanted the therapy 
but the husband absolutely refused it Rather than wasting energy trying to 
deal with the man directly, Dr. Erickson would see the wife alone, and as 
she talked he would interject interpretations of the husband’s behavior that 
he knew would rile the husband up if he heard them. Sure enough, the wife 
would tell her husband what the doctor had said. After a few weeks the 


212 


LAW 26 



husband would be so furious he would insist on joining his wife in the ses¬ 
sions so he could set the doctor straight 

Finally, you may well find cases in which deliberately offering yourself 
as the cat’s-paw will ultimately gain you great power. This is the ruse of the 
perfect courtier. Its symbol is Sir Walter Raleigh, who once placed his own 
cloak on the muddy ground so that Queen Elizabeth would not sully her 
shoes. As the instrument that protects a master or peer from unpleasant¬ 
ness or danger, you gain immense respect, which sooner or later will pay 
dividends. And remember: If you can make your assistance subtle and gra¬ 
cious rather than boastful and burdensome, your recompense will be that 
much the more satisfying and powerful. 


Image: The Cat’s-Paw. 

It has long claws to grab 
things. It is soft and 
padded. Take hold of the cat 
and use its paw to pluck 
things out of the fire, to claw 
your enemy, to play with the 
mouse before devouring it 
Sometimes you hurt the 
cat, but most often it 
doesn’t feel a thing. 


Authority: Do everything pleasant yourself, everything unpleas¬ 
ant through third parties. Rv adopting the first course you win 
favor, by taking the second you deflect ill will. Important affairs 
often require rewards and punishments. l et only the good come 
from you and the evil from others. (Raltasar Gracian, 1601-1658) 


LAW 26 


213 



REVERSAL 

The cat’s-paw and the scapegoat must be used with extreme caution and 
delicacy. They are like screens that hide your own involvement in dirty 
work from the public; if at any moment the screen is lifted and you are 
seen as the manipulator* the puppet master, the whole dynamic turns 
around—your hand will be seen everywhere, and you will be blamed for 
misfortunes you may have had nothing to do with. Once the truth is re¬ 
vealed, events will snowball beyond your control. 

In 1572, Queen Catherine de’ Medicis of France conspired to do away 
with Gaspard de Coligny, an admiral in the French navy and a leading 
member of the Huguenot (French Protestant) community. Coligny was 
close to Catherine’s son, Charles IX, and she feared his growing influence 
on the young king. So she arranged for a member of the Guise family, one 
of the most powerful royal clans in France, to assassinate him. 

Secretly, however, Catherine had another plan: She wanted the Hu¬ 
guenots to blame the Guises for killing one of their leaders, and to take re¬ 
venge. With one blow, she would erase or injure two threatening rivals, 
Coligny and the Guise family. Yet both plans went awry. The assassin 
missed his target, only wounding Coligny; knowing Catherine as his 
enemy, he strongly suspected it was she who had set up the attack on him, 
and he told the king so. Eventually the failed assassination and the argu¬ 
ments that ensued from it set off a chain of events that led to a bloody civil 
war between Catholics and Protestants, culminating in the horrifying Mas¬ 
sacre of St. Bartholomew’s Eve, in which thousands of Protestants were 
killed. 

If you have to use a cat’s-paw or a scapegoat in an action of great con¬ 
sequence, be very careful: Too much can go wrong. It is often wiser to use 
such dupes in more innocent endeavors, where mistakes or miscalculations 
will cause no serious harm. 

Finally, there are moments when it is advantageous to not disguise 
your involvement or responsibility, but rather to take the blame yourself 
for some mistake. If you have power and are secure in it, you should some¬ 
times play tine penitent: With a sorrowful look, you ask for forgiveness 
from those weaker than you. It is the ploy of the king who makes a show of 
his own sacrifices for the good of the people. Similarly, upon occasion you 
may want to appear as the agent of punishment in order to instill fear and 
trembling in your subordinates. Instead of the cat’s-paw you show your 
own mighty hand as a threatening gesture. Play such a card sparingly. If 
you play it too often, fear will turn into resentment and hatred. Before you 
know it, such emotions will spark a vigorous opposition that will someday 
bring you down. Get in the habit of using a cat’s-paw-—it is far safer. 




LAW 



PLAY ON PEOPLE’S NEED 
TO BELIEVE TO CREATE A 
CULTLIKE FOLLOWING 


JUDGMENT 

People have an overwhelming desire to believe in some- 
thing . Become the focal point of such desire by offering 
them a cause; a new faith to follow . Keep your words 
vague but full of promise; emphasize enthusiasm over ra¬ 
tionality and clear thinking. Give your new disciples rit¬ 
uals to perform t ask them to make sacrifices on your 
behalf In the absence of organized religion and grand 
causes f your new belief system will bring you untold 
power. 



It was to the charlatan's 
advantage that the indi¬ 
viduals predisposed to 
credulity should multi¬ 
ply,. that the groups of 
his adherents should 
enlarge to mass 
proportions , guarantee¬ 
ing an ever greater 
scope for his triumphs. 
And this was in fact to 
occur, as science was 
popularized, from the 
Renaissance on down 
through succeeding 
centuries. With the 
immense growth of 
knowledge, and its 
spread through print¬ 
ing in modem times, 
the mass of the half 
educated, the eagerly 
gullible prey of the 
quack, also increased, 
became indeed a 
majority; real power 
could be based on their 
wishes, opinions, pref¬ 
erences, and rejections. 
The charlatan's empire 
accordingly widened 
with the modem 
dissemination of 
knowledge; since he 
operated on the basis 
of science, ho we ver 
much he perverted it, 
producing gold with a 
technique borrowed 
from chemistry and his 
wonderful balsams 
with the apparatus of 
medicine, he could not 
appeal to an entirely 
ignorant folk. The illit¬ 
erate would be 
protected against his 
absurdities by their 
healthy common sense. 
His choicest audience 
would be composed of 
the semiliterate, those 
who had exchanged 
their common sense for 
a tittle distorted in for¬ 
mation and had 


THE SCIENCE OF CHARLATANISM, 

OR HOW TO CREATE A CULT IN FIVE EASY STEPS 
In searching, as you must, for the methods that will gain you the most 
power for the least effort, you will find the creation of a cultlike following 
one of the most effective. Having a large following opens up all sorts of 
possibilities for deception; not only will your followers worship you, they 
will defend you from your enemies and will voluntarily take on the work of 
enticing others to join your fledgling cult. This kind of power will lift you to 
another realm: You will no longer have to struggle or use subterfuge to en¬ 
force your will. You are adored and can do no wrong. 

You might think it a gargantuan task to create such a following, but in 
fact it is fairly simple. As humans, we have a desperate need to believe in 
something, anything. This makes us eminently gullible: We simply cannot 
endure long periods of doubt, or of the emptiness that comes from a lack of 
something to believe in. Dangle in front of us some new cause, elixir, get- 
rich-quick scheme, or the latest technological trend or art movement and 
we leap from the water as one to take the bait. Look at history: The chroni¬ 
cles of the new trends and cults that have made a mass following for them¬ 
selves could fill a library. After a few centuries, a few decades, a few years, 
a few months, they generally look ridiculous, but at the time they seem so 
attractive, so transcendental, so divine. 

Always in a rush to believe in something, we will manufacture saints 
and faiths out of nothing. Do not let this gullibility go to waste: Make your¬ 
self the object of worship. Make people form a cult around you. 

The great European charlatans of the sixteenth and seventeenth cen¬ 
turies mastered the art of cultmaking. They lived, as we do now, in a time 
of transformation: Organized religion was on the wane, science on the rise. 
People were desperate to rally around a new cause or faith. The charlatans 
had begun by peddling health elixirs and alchemic shortcuts to wealth. 
Moving quickly from town to town, they originally focused on small 
groups—until, by accident, they stumbled on a truth of human nature: 
The larger the group they gathered around themselves, the easier it was to 
deceive. 

The charlatan would station himself on a high wooden platform (hence 
the term “mountebank”) and crowds would swarm around him. In a group 
setting, people were more emotional, less able to reason. Had the charlatan 
spoken to them individually, they might have found him ridiculous, but lost 
in a crowd they got caught up in a communal mood of rapt attention. It be¬ 
came impossible for them to find the distance to be skeptical. Any deficien¬ 
cies in the charlatan’s ideas were hidden by the zeal of the mass. Passion 
and enthusiasm swept through the crowd like a contagion, and they reacted 
violently to anyone who dared to spread a seed of doubt. Both consciously 
studying this dynamic over decades of experiment and spontaneously 
adapting to these situations as they happened, the charlatans perfected the 
science of attracting and holding a crowd, molding the crowd into followers 
and the followers into a cult 


216 


LAW 27 



The gimmicks of the charlatans may seem quaint today, but there are 
thousands of charlatans among us still, using the same tried-and-true meth¬ 
ods their predecessors refined centuries ago, only changing the names of 
their elixirs and modernizing the look of their cults. We find these latter- 
day charlatans in all arenas of life—business, fashion, politics, art. Many of 
them, perhaps, are following in the charlatan tradition without having any 
knowledge of its history, but you can be more systematic and deliberate. 
Simply follow the five steps of cultmaking that our charlatan ancestors per¬ 
fected over the years. 

Step X: Keep It Vague; Keep It Simple. To create a cult you must first 
attract attention. This you should do not through actions, which are too 
clear and readable, but through words, which are hazy and deceptive. Your 
initial speeches, conversations, and interviews must include two elements; 
on the one hand the promise of something great and transformative, and 
on the other a total vagueness. This combination will stimulate all kinds of 
hazy dreams in your listeners, who will make their own connections and 
see what they want to see. 

To make your vagueness attractive, use words of great resonance but 
cloudy meaning, words full of heat and enthusiasm. Fancy titles for simple 
things are helpful, as are the use of numbers and the creation of new words 
for vague concepts. All of these create the impression of specialized knowl¬ 
edge, giving you a veneer of profundity. By the same token, try to make the 
subject of your cult new and fresh, so that few will understand it. Done right, 
the combination of vague promises, cloudy but alluring concepts, and fiery 
enthusiasm will stir people’s souls and a group will form around you. 

Talk too vaguely and you have no credibility. But it is more dangerous 
to be specific. If you explain in detail the benefits people will gain by fol¬ 
lowing your cult, you will be expected to satisfy them. 

As a corollary to its vagueness your appeal should also be simple. 
Most people’s problems have complex causes: deep-rooted neurosis, inter¬ 
connected social factors, roots that go way back in time and are exceed¬ 
ingly hard to unravel. Few, however, have the patience to deal with this; 
most people want to hear that a simple solution will cure their problems. 
The ability to offer this kind of solution will give you great power and build 
you a following. Instead of the complicated explanations of real life, return 
to the primitive solutions of our ancestors, to good old country remedies, to 
mysterious panaceas. 

Step 2: Emphasize the Visual and the Sensual over the Intellectual. 

Once people have begun to gather around you, two dangers will present 
themselves: boredom and skepticism. Boredom will make people go else¬ 
where; skepticism will allow them the distance to think rationally about 
whatever it is you are offering, blowing away the mist you have artfully cre¬ 
ated and revealing your ideas for what they are. You need to amuse the 
bored, then, and ward off the cynics. 


encountered science 
and education at some 
time, though briefly 
and unsuccessfully .... 
The great mass of 
mankind has always 
been predisposed to 
marvel at mysteries, 
and this was especially 
true at certain historic 
periods when the 
secure foundations of 
life seemed shaken and 
old'values, economic or 
spiritual, long accepted 
as certainties, could tut 
longer be relied upon. 
Then the numbers of 
the charlatan’s dupes 
multiplied—the “self 
killers, ” as a seven¬ 
teenth-century English - 
man called them. 

THE POWER OF THE 
CHARLATAN, 

Gr.ete ok Francesco, 
1939 


im OW L WHO 
WAS COD 

Once upon a starless 
midnight there was an 
owl who sat on the 
branch of an oak tree. 
Two ground moles 
tried to slip quietly by, 
unnoticed. “You!"said 
the owl. “Who?"they 
quavered, in fear and 
astonishment, for they 
could not believe it was 
possible for anyone to 
see them in that thick 
darkness. “ You two!" 
said the owl. The moles 
hurried away and told 
(he other creatures of 
the field and forest that 
the owl was the greatest 
and wisest of all 
animals because he 
could see in the dark 


LAW 27 


217 




and because he could 
answer any question. 

“ I'll see about that, ” 
said a secretary bird , 
and he called on the 
owl one night when it 
was again very dark. 

“How many claws am f 
holding up? ” said the 
secretary bird. “ Two, ” 
said the owl, and that 
was right. “Can you 
give me another 
expression for 'that is 
to say'or 'namely?'" 
asked the secretary 
bird. “To wit,"said the 
owl. “ Why does a lover 
call on his love?" asked 
the secretary bird. "To 
woo, ” said the owl. 
The secretary bird 
hastened back to the 
other creatures and 
reported that the owl 
was indeed the greatest 
and wisest animal in 
the world because he 
could see in the dark 
and because he could 
answer any question. 
“Can he see in the 
daytime, too?" asked a 
red fox. “Yes," echoed a 
dormouse and a 
French poodle. “Can he 
see in the daytime , 
too?" All the other 
creatures laughed 
loudly at this silly ques¬ 
tion, and they set upon 
the red fox and his 
friends and drove them 
out of the region. Then 
they sent a messenger 
to the owl and asked 
him to be their leader. 
When the owl appeared 
among the animals it 
was high noon and the 
sun was shining 
brightly. He walked 
very slowly, which gave 
him an appearance of 
great dignity, and he 
peered about him with 
large, staring eyes, 
which gave him an air 


The best way to do this is through theater, or other devices of its kind. 
Surround yourself with luxury, dazzle your followers with visual splendor, 
fill their eyes with spectacle. Not only will this keep them from seeing the 
ridiculousness of your ideas, the holes in your belief system, it will also at¬ 
tract more attention, more followers. Appeal to all the senses: Use incense 
for scent, soothing music for hearing, colorful charts and graphs for the 
eye. You might even tickle the mind, perhaps by using new technological 
gadgets to give your cult a pseudo-scientific veneer—as long as you do not 
make anyone really think. Use the exotic—distant cultures, strange cus¬ 
toms—to create theatrical effects, and to make the most banal and ordinary 
affairs seem signs of something extraordinary. 

Step 3: Borrow the Forms of Organized Religion to Structure the 
Group. Your cultlike following is growing; it is time to organize it. Find a 
way both elevating and comforting. Organized religions have long held un¬ 
questioned authority for large numbers of people, and continue to do so in 
our supposedly secular age. And even if the religion itself has faded some, 
its forms still resonate with power. The lofty and holy associations of orga¬ 
nized religion can be endlessly exploited. Create rituals for your followers; 
organize them into a hierarchy, ranking them in grades of sanctity, and giv¬ 
ing them names and titles that resound with religious overtones; ask them 
for sacrifices that will fill your coffers and increase your power. To empha¬ 
size your gathering’s quasi-religious nature, talk and act like a prophet. You 
axe not a dictator, after all; you are a priest, a guru, a sage, a shaman, or any 
other word that hides your real power in the mist of religion. 

Step 4: Disguise Your Source of Income. Your group has grown, and you 
have structured it in a churchlike form. Your coffers are beginning to fill 
with your followers’ money. Yet you must never be seen as hungry for 
money and the power it brings. It is at this moment that you must disguise 
the source of your income. 

Your followers want to believe that if they follow you all sorts of good 
things will fall into their lap. By surrounding yourself with luxury you be¬ 
come living proof of the soundness of your belief system. Never reveal that 
your wealth actually comes from your followers’ pockets; instead, make it 
seem to come from the truth of your methods. Followers will copy your 
each and every move in the belief that it will bring them the same results, 
and their imitative enthusiasm will blind them to the charlatan nature of 
your wealth. 

Step 5: Set Up an Us-Versus-Them Dynamic. The group is now large 
and thriving, a magnet attracting more and more particles. If you are not 
careful, though, inertia will set in, and time and boredom will demagnetize 
the group. To keep your followers united, you must now do what all reli¬ 
gions and belief systems have done: create an us-versus-them dynamic. 

First, make sure your followers believe they are part of an exclusive 


218 ! LAW 27 



club, unified by a bond of common goals. Then, to strengthen this bond, 
manufacture the notion of a devious enemy out to ruin you. There is a 
force of nonbelievers that will do anything to stop you. Any outsider who 
tries to reveal the charlatan nature of your belief system can now be de¬ 
scribed as a member of this devious force. 

If you have no enemies, invent one. Given a straw man to react 
against, your followers will tighten and cohere. They have your cause to 
believe in and infidels to destroy. 


OBSERVANCES OF THE LAW 


Observance I 

In the year 1653, a twenty-seven-year-old Milan man named Francesco 
Giuseppe Borri claimed to have had a vision. He went around town telling 
one and all that the archangel Michael had appeared to him and an¬ 
nounced that he had been chosen to be the capitano generate of the Army 
of the New Pope, an army that would seize and revitalize the world. 
The archangel had further revealed that Borri now had the power to see 
people’s souls, and that he would soon discover the philosopher’s stone—a 
long-sought after substance that could change base metals into gold. 
Friends and acquaintances who heard Boni explain the vision, and who 
witnessed the change that had come over him, were impressed, for Borri 
had previously devoted himself to a life of wine, women, and gambling. 
Now he gave all that up, plunging himself into the study of alchemy and 
talking only of mysticism and the occult. 

The transformation was so sudden and miraculous, and Born’s words 
were so filled with enthusiasm, that he began to create a following. Unfor¬ 
tunately the Italian Inquisition began to notice him as well—they prose¬ 
cuted anyone who delved into the occult—so he left Italy and began to 
wander Europe, from Austria to Holland, telling one and all that “to those 
who follow me all joy shall be granted.” Wherever Borri stayed he at¬ 
tracted followers. His method was simple: He spoke of his vision, which 
had grown more and more elaborate, and offered to “look into” the soul of 
anyone who believed him (and they were many). Seemingly in a trance, he 
would stare at this new follower for several minutes, then claim to have 
seen the person’s soul, degree of enlightenment, and potential for spiritual 
greatness. If what he saw showed promise, he would add the person to his 
growing order of disciples, an honor indeed. 

The cult had six degrees, into which the disciples were assigned ac¬ 
cording to what Borri had glimpsed in their souls. With work and total de¬ 
votion to the cult they could graduate to a higher degree. Borri—whom 
they called “His Excellency,” and “Universal Doctor”—demanded from 
them the strictest vows of poverty. All the goods and moneys they pos¬ 
sessed had to be turned over to him. But they did not mind handing over 
their property, for Borri had told them, “I shall soon bring my chemical 


of tremendous impor¬ 
tance . “He's God!" 
screamed a Plymouth 
Rock hen ; And the 
others took up the cry 
“He's' God!" So they 
followed him wherever 
he went and when he 
began to bump into 
things they began to 
hump into things, too. 
Finally he came to a 
concrete highway and 
he started up the 
middle of it and all the 
Other creatures 
followed him. Presently 
a hawk , who was acting 
(ts outrider ; observed a 
truck coming toward 
them at fifty miles an 
hour, and he reported 
to the secretary bird 
and the secretary bird 
reported to the owl, 

" There’s danger 
ahead, ” said the secre¬ 
tary bird . “To wit? " 
said the owl. The secre¬ 
tary bird told him. 

“ Aren’t you afraid 
He asked. “Who ?” said 
(he owl calmly, for he 
could not see the truck. 
“He’s God!" cried all 
the creatures again, and 
they were still crying 
“He’s God!" when the 
truck hit them and ran 
them down. Some of 
the animals were 
merely injured, but 
most of them , including 
the owl . were killed . 
Moral ; You can fool too 
many of the people too 
much of the time. 

THE THOR HER 
CARNIVAL, 

James Thurber , 

1894-196! 


LAW 27 219 



To become (he founder 
of a new religion one 
muse he psychology 
catty in fallible in (trie’s 
knowledge of a certain 
average type of souls 
who have not yet 
recognized that they 
belong together,: 

Friedrich Nietzsche, 
1844-1900 


Men are so simple of 
mind, ami so much 
dominated by their 
immediate needs. that a 
deceitful man will 
always find plenty who 
are ready to he 
deceived. 

N ICCOLO M ACHIAVEl.LI, 
1469 !527 


THE TEMPLE. 

OF HEALTH 

fin the late t7H(hj the 
Scottish quack James 
Graham .., was 
winning a large follow¬ 
ing and great riches in 
London.... (Graham} 
maintained a show of 
great scientific tech¬ 
nique. In 1772... he 
had visited Philadel¬ 
phia, where he met 
Benjamin Franklin and 
became interested in 
the hitter’s experiments 
with electricity. These 
appear to have inspired 
the apparatus in the 
“ Temple of Health," 


220 i LAW 27 


studies to a happy conclusion by the discovery of the philosopher’s stone, 
and by this means we shall all have as much gold as we desire.” 

Given his growing wealth, Borri began to change his style of living. 
Renting the most splendid apartment in the city into which he had tem¬ 
porarily settled, he would furnish it with fabulous furniture and accessories, 
which he had begun to collect. He would drive through the city in a coach 
studded with jewels, with six magnificent black horses at its head. He never 
stayed too long in one place, and when he disappeared, saying he had 
more souls to gather into his flock, his reputation only grew in his absence. 
He became famous, although in fact he had never done a single concrete 
thing. 

From all over Europe, the blind, the crippled, and the desperate came 
to visit Borri, for word had spread that he had healing powers. He asked no 
fee for his services, which only made him seem more marvelous, and in¬ 
deed some claimed that in this or that city he had performed a miracle 
cure. By only hinting at his accomplishments, he encouraged people’s 
imaginations to blow them up to fantastic proportions. His wealth, for ex¬ 
ample, actually came from the vast sums he was collecting from his in¬ 
creasingly select group of rich disciples; yet it was presumed that he had in 
fact perfected the philosopher’s stone. The Church continued to pursue 
him, denouncing him for heresy and witchcraft, and Born’s response to 
these charges was a dignified silence; this only enhanced his reputation and 
made his followers more passionate. Only the great are persecuted, after 
all; how many understood Jesus Christ in his own time? Borri did not have 
to say a word—his followers now called the Pope the Antichrist 

And so Borri’s power grew and grew, until one day he left the city of 
Amsterdam {where he had settled for a while), absconding with huge sums 
of borrowed money and diamonds that had been entrusted to him. (He 
claimed to be able to remove the flaws from diamonds through the power 
of his gifted mind.) Now he was on the run. The Inquisition eventually 
caught up with him, and for die last twenty years of his life he was impris¬ 
oned in Rome. But so great was the belief in his occult powers that to his 
dying day he was visited by wealthy believers, including Queen Christina 
of Sweden. Supplying him with money and materials, these visitors al¬ 
lowed him to continue his search for the elusive philosopher’s stone. 
Interpretation 

Before he formed his cult, Borri seems to have stumbled on a critical dis¬ 
covery. Tiring of his life of debauchery, he had decided to give it up and to 
devote himself to the occult, a genuine interest of his. He must have no¬ 
ticed, however, that when he alluded to a mystical experience (rather than 
physical exhaustion) as the source of his conversion, people of all classes 
wanted to hear more. Realizing the power he could gain by ascribing the 
change to something external and mysterious, he went further with his 
manufactured visions. The grander the vision, and the more sacrifices he 
asked for, the more appealing and believable his story seemed to become. 

Remember: People are not interested in the truth about change. They 



do not want to hear that it has come from hard work, or from anything as 
banal as exhaustion, boredom, or depression; they are dying to believe in 
something romantic, otherworldly. They want to hear of angels and out-of- 
body experiences. Indulge them. Hint at the mystical source of some per¬ 
sonal change, wrap it in ethereal colors, and a cultlike following will form 
around you. Adapt to people’s needs: The messiah must mirror the desires 
of his followers. And always aim high. The bigger and bolder your illusion, 
the better. 

Observance II 

In the mid- 1700s, word spread in Europe’s fashionable society of a Swiss 
country doctor named Michael Schuppach who practiced a different kind 
of medicine: He used the healing powers of nature to perform miraculous 
cures. Soon well-to-do people from all over the Continent, their ailments 
both serious and mild, were making the trek to the alpine village of Lang- 
nau, where Schuppach lived and worked. Trudging through the mountains, 
these visitors witnessed the most dramatic natural landscapes that Europe 
has to offer. By the time they reached Langnau, they were already feeling 
transformed and on their way to health. 

Schuppach, who had become known as simply the “Mountain Doc¬ 
tor,” had a small pharmacy in town. This place became quite a scene: 
Crowds of people from many different countries would cram the small 
room, its walls lined with colorful bottles filled with herbal cures. Where 
most doctors of the time prescribed foul-tasting concoctions that bore in¬ 
comprehensible Latin titles (as medicines often do still), Schiippach’s cures 
had names such as “The Oil of Joy,” “Little Flower’s Heart,” or “Against 
the Monster,” and they tasted sweet and pleasing. 

Visitors to Langnau would have to wait patiently for a visit with the 
Mountain Doctor, because every day some eighty messengers would arrive 
at the pharmacy bearing flasks of urine from all over Europe. Schuppach 
claimed he could diagnose what ailed you simply by looking at a sample of 
your urine and reading a written description of your ailment. (Naturally he 
read the description very carefully before prescribing a cure.) When he fi¬ 
nally had a spare minute (the urine samples took up much of his time), he 
would call the visitor into his office in the pharmacy. He would then exam¬ 
ine this person’s urine sample, explaining that its appearance would tell 
him everything he needed to know. Country people had a sense for these 
things, he would say—their wisdom came from living a simple, godly life 
with none of the complications of urban living. This personal consultation 
would also include a discussion as to how one might bring one’s soul more 
into harmony with nature. 

Schiippach had devised many forms of treatment, each profoundly un¬ 
like the usual medical practices of the time. He was a believer, for instance, 
in electric shock therapy. To those who wondered whether this was in 
keeping with his belief in the healing power of nature, he would explain 
that electricity is a natural phenomenon; he was merely imitating the 


the fabulous establish¬ 
ment he opened in 
London for the sale of 
his elixirs .... In the 
chief room . where he 
received patients, stood 
“the largest air pump 
in the world” to assist 
him in his “philosophi¬ 
cal investigations " into 
disease, and also a 
“stupendous metallic 
conductor .; ” a richly 
gilded pedestal 
surrounded with retorts 
and vials of “etherial 
and other essences ." 

... According to J. 
Ennemoser, who 
published a history of 
magic in 1844 at 
Leipzig . Graham’s 
“ house ... united the 
useful with the pleasur¬ 
able. Everywhere the 
utmost magnificence 
was displayed. Even in 
the outer court, averred 
an eye-witness, it 
seemed as though art, 
invention, and riches 
had been exhausted. 

On the side walls in the 
chambers an arc¬ 
shaped glow was 
provided by artificial 
electric light;.star rays 
darted forth; transpar¬ 
ent glasses o f all colors 
were placed with clever 
selection and much 
taste. All this, the same 
eyewitness assures us, 
was ravishing and 
exalted the imagination 
to the highest degree." 
Visitors were given a 
printed sheet of rules 
for healthy living. In 
the Great Apollo 
Apartment they might 
join in mysterious ritu¬ 
als, accompanied by 
chants: ' Hail, Vital Air, 
aethereal! Magnetic 
Magic, hail!” And 
while they hailed the 


LAW 27 j 221 




magic of magnetism, 
the windows were 
darkened, revealing a 
ceiling studded with 
electric stars ami a 
young and lovely 
"Rosy Goddess of 
Health " in a niche.... 

Every evening this 
Temple of Health was 
crowded with guests; it 
had become the fashion 
to visit it and try the 
great twelve-foot bed of 
state, the "Grand Celes¬ 
tial Bed," said to cure 
any disease.... This 
bed, according to 
Ennemoser, “stood in a 
splendid room, into 
which a cylinder led 
from an adjoining 
chamber to conduct the 
healing currents... at 
the same time all sorts 
of pleasing scents of 
strengthening herbs 
and Oriental incense 
were also brought in 
through glass tubes. 
The heavenly bed itself 
rested upon six solid 
transparent pillars; the 
bedclothes were of 
purple and sky-blue. 
Atlas silk, spread over 
a mattress saturated 
with A rabtan perfumed 
waters to suit the tastes 
of the Persian court. 
The chamber in which 
it was placed he called 
the Sanctum Sancto¬ 
rum. .. .To add to all 
this, there were the 
melodious notes of the 
harmonica, soft flutes, 
agreeable voices, and a 
great organ. ” 

THE POWER OF THE 
CHARLATAN. 

Crete de Francesco, 
1939 


power of lightning. One of his patients claimed to be inhabited by seven 
devils. The doctor cured him with electrical shocks, and as he administered 
these he exclaimed that he could see the devils flying out of the man’s 
body, one by one. Another man claimed to have swallowed a hay wagon 
and its driver, which were causing him massive pains in the chest. The 
Mountain Doctor listened patiently, claimed to be able to hear the crack of 
a whip in the man’s belly, promised to cure him, and gave him a sedative 
and a purgative. The man fell asleep on a chair outside the pharmacy. As 
soon as he awoke he vomited, and as he vomited a hay wagon sped past 
him (the Mountain Doctor had hired it for the occasion), the crack of its 
whip making him feel that somehow he had indeed expelled it under the 
doctor’s care. 

Over the years, the Mountain Doctor’s fame grew. He was consulted 
by the powerful-—even the writer Goethe made the trek to his village-—and 
he became the center of a cult of nature in which everything natural was 
considered worthy of worship. Schiippach was careful to create effects that 
would entertain and inspire his patients. A professor who visited him once 
wrote, “One stands or sits in company, one plays cards, sometimes with a 
young woman; now a concert is given, now a lunch or supper, and now a 
little ballet is presented. With a very happy effect, the freedom of nature is 
everywhere united with the pleasures of the beau monde, and if the doctor 
is not able to heal any diseases, he can at least cure hypochondria and the 
vapors.” 

Interpretation 

Schiippach had begun his career as an ordinary village doctor. He would 
sometimes use in his practice some of the village remedies he had grown 
up with, and apparently he noticed some results, for soon these herbal tinc¬ 
tures and natural forms of healing became his specialty. And in fact his nat¬ 
ural form of healing did have profound psychological effects on his 
patients. Where the normal drugs of the time created fear and pain, Schiip- 
paeh’s treatments were comfortable and soothing. The resulting improve¬ 
ment in the patient’s mood was a critical element in the cures he brought 
about. His patients believed so deeply in his skills that they willed them¬ 
selves into health. Instead of scoffing at their irrational explanations for 
their ailments, Schiippach used their hypochondria to make it seem that he 
had effected a great cure. 

The case of the Mountain Doctor teaches us valuable lessons in the 
creation of a cultlike following. First, you must find a way to engage peo¬ 
ple’s will, to make their belief in your powers strong enough that they 
imagine all sorts of benefits. Their belief will have a self-fulfilling quality, 
but you must make sure that it is you, rather than their own will, who is 
seen as the agent of transformation. Find the belief, cause, or fantasy that 
will make them believe with a passion and they will imagine the rest, wor¬ 
shipping you as healer, prophet, genius, whatever you like. 

Second, Schiippach teaches us the everlasting power of belief in na¬ 
ture, and in simplicity. Nature, in reality, is full of much that is terrifying— 
poisonous plants, fierce animals, sudden disasters, plagues. Belief in the 


222 


LAW 27 



healing, comforting quality of nature is really a constructed myth, a roman¬ 
ticism. But the appeal to nature can bring you great power, especially in 
complicated and stressful times. 

This appeal, however, must be handled right Devise a kind of theater 
of nature in which you, as the director, pick and choose the qualities that fit 
the romanticism of the times. The Mountain Doctor played the part to per¬ 
fection, playing up his homespun wisdom and wit, and staging his cures as 
dramatic pieces. He did not make himself one with nature; instead he 
molded nature into a cult, an artificial construction. To create a “natural” 
effect you actually have to work hard, making nature theatrical and de¬ 
lightfully pagan. Otherwise no one will notice. Nature too must follow 
trends and be progressive. 

Observance III 

In 1788, at the age of fifty-five, the doctor and scientist Franz Mesmer was 
at a crossroads. He was a pioneer in the study of animal magnetism—the 
belief that animals contain magnetic matter, and that a doctor or specialist 
can effect miraculous cures by working on this charged substance—but in 
Vienna, where he lived, his theories had met with scorn and ridicule from 
the medical establishment. In treating women for convulsions, Mesmer 
claimed to have worked a number of cures, his proudest achievement 
being the restoration of sight to a blind girl. But another doctor who exam¬ 
ined the young girl said she was as blind as ever, an assessment with which 
she herself agreed. Mesmer countered that his enemies were out to slander 
him by winning her over to their side. This claim only elicited more 
ridicule. Clearly the sober-minded Viennese were the wrong audience for 
his theories, and so he decided to move to Paris and start again. 

Renting a splendid apartment in his new city, Mesmer decorated it ap¬ 
propriately. Stained glass in most of the windows created a religious feel¬ 
ing, and mirrors on all the walls produced an hypnotic effect The doctor 
advertised that in his apartment he would give demonstrations of the pow¬ 
ers of animal magnetism, inviting the diseased and melancholic to feel its 
powers. Soon Parisians of all classes (but mostly women, who seemed more 
attracted to the idea than men did) were paying for entry to witness the 
miracles that Mesmer promised. 

Inside the apartment, the scents of orange blossom and exotic incense 
wafted through special vents. As the initiates filtered into the salon where 
the demonstrations took place, they heard harp music and the lulling 
sounds of a female vocalist coming from another room. In the center of the 
salon was a long oval container filled with water that Mesmer claimed had 
been magnetized. From holes in the container’s metal lid protruded long 
movable iron rods. The visitors were instructed to sit around the container, 
place these magnetized rods on the body part that gave them pains or 
problems, and then hold hands with their neighbors, sitting as close as pos¬ 
sible to one another to help the magnetic force pass between their bodies. 
Sometimes, too, they were attached to each other by cords. 

Mesmer would leave the room, and “assistant magnetizers”—all hand- 


TflK rovrai or A I IK 

In the town of 
Tamopol lived a man 
by the name of Reb 
Feivel. One day, as he 
sat in his house deeply 
absorbed in his 
Talmud . he heard a 
loud noise outside. 
When he went to the 
window he .vaiv a lot of 
little pranksters. ‘'Up to 
some new piece of 
mischief, no doubt ," he 
thought. 

“Children, run quickly 
to the synagogue, " he 
cried, leaning out and 
improvising the first 
story that occurred to 
him . “You'llsee. there a 
sea monster, and what a 
monsterl It’s a creature 
with five feet, three 
eyes, and a beard like 
that of a goat, only it’s 
green!" 

And sure enough the 
children scampered off 
and Reb Feivel 
returned to his studies. 
He smiled into his 
beard as he thought of 
the trick he had played 
on those little rascals. 

It wasn 7 long before 
his studies were inter¬ 
rupted again, this time 
by running footsteps. 
When he went to the 
window he saw several 
Jews running. 

“Where, are you 
running?'' he called 
out. 

“To the synagogue!" 
answered the Jews. 
"Haven't you heard? 
There’s a sea monster, 
there’s a creature with 
five legs, three eyes, and 
a beard like that of a 
goat, only it's green 1” 
Reb feivel laughed 
with glee, thinking of 
the trick he had played. 

223 


LAW 27 



and sal down again to 
his Talmud. 
But no sooner had he 
begun to concentrate 
when suddenly he 
heard a dinning tumult 
outside. And what did 
he see? A great crowd 
of men, women and 
children, all running 
toward the synagogue. 

“ What’s up?”he cried, 
sticking his head out of 
the window . 
“What a question! 
Why, don't you know?" 
they answered. “Right 
in front of the syna¬ 
gogue there's a sea 
monster, it’s a creature 
with five legs, three 
eyes, and a beard like 
that of a goat, only 
it’s green! ” 
And as the crowd 
hurried by, Reb Feivel 
suddenly noticed that 
the rabbi himself was 
among them. 
“Lord of the world!” 
he exclaimed. “If the 
rabbi himself is 
running with them 
surely there must be 
something happening. 
Where there’s smoke 
there’s fire!" 
Without further 
thought Reb Feivel 
grabbed his hat, left his 
house, and also 
began running. 
“Who can tell?”he 
mu ttered to himself as 
he ran, all out of 
breath, toward the 
synagogue. 

A TREASURY OF 
JEWISH FOLKLORE, 

Nathan Ausubel, ed., 
1948 


some and strapping young men—would enter with jars of magnetized 
water that they would sprinkle on the patients, nibbing the healing fluid on 
their bodies, massaging it into their skin, moving them toward a trancelike 
state. And after a few minutes a kind of delirium would overcome the 
women. Some would sob, some would shriek and tear their hair, others 
would laugh hysterically. At the height of the delirium Mesmer would 
reenter the salon, dressed in a flowing silk robe embroidered with golden 
flowers and carrying a white magnetic rod. Moving around the container, 
he would stroke and soothe the patients until calm was restored. Many 
women would later attribute the strange power he had on them to his 
piercing look, which, they thought, was exciting or quieting the magnetic 
fluids in their bodies. 

Within months of his arrival in Paris, Mesmer became the rage. His 
supporters included Marie-Antoinette herself, the queen of France, wife of 
Louis XVI. As in Vienna, he was condemned by the official faculty of med¬ 
icine, but it did not matter. His growing following of pupils and patients 
paid him handsomely. 

Mesmer expanded his theories to proclaim that all humanity could be 
brought into harmony through the power of magnetism, a concept with 
much appeal during the French Revolution. A cult of Mesmerism spread 
across the country; in many towns, “Societies of Harmony” sprang up to 
experiment with magnetism. These societies eventually became notorious: 
They tended to be led by libertines who would turn their sessions into a 
kind of group orgy. 

At the height of Mesmer’s popularity, a French commission published 
a report based on years of testing the theory of animal magnetism. The 
conclusion: Magnetism’s effects on the body actually came from a kind of 
group hysteria and autosuggestion. The report was well documented, and 
mined Mesmer’s reputation in France. He left the country and went into 
retirement. Only a few years later, however, imitators sprang up all over 
Europe and the cult of Mesmerism spread once again, its believers more 
numerous than ever. 

Interpretation 

Mesmer’s career can be broken into two parts. When still in Vienna, he 
clearly believed in the validity of his theory, and did all he could to prove 
it But his growing frustration and the disapproval of his colleagues made 
him adopt another strategy. First he moved to Paris, where no one knew 
him, and where his extravagant theories found a more fruitful soil. Then he 
appealed to the French love of theater and spectacle, making his apartment 
into a kind of magical world in which a sensory overload of smells, sights, 
and sounds entranced his customers. Most important, from now on he 
practiced his magnetism only on a group. The group provided the setting 
in which the magnetism would have its proper effect, one believer infecting 
the other, overwhelming any individual doubter. 

Mesmer thus passed from being a confirmed advocate of magnetism 
to the role of a charlatan using every trick in the book to captivate the pub- 


224 


LAW 27 



lie. The biggest trick of ail was to play on the repressed sexuality that bub¬ 
bles under the surface of any group setting. In a group, a longing for social 
unity, a longing older than civilization, cries out to be awakened. This de¬ 
sire may be subsumed under a unifying cause, but beneath it is a repressed 
sexuality that the charlatan knows how to exploit and manipulate for his 
own purposes. 

This is the lesson that Mesmer teaches us: Our tendency to doubt, the 
distance that allows us to reason, is broken down when we join a group. 
The warmth and infectiousness of the group overwhelm the skeptical indi¬ 
vidual. This is the power you gain by creating a cult. Also, by playing on 
people’s repressed sexuality, you lead them into mistaking their excited 
feelings for signs of your mystical strength. You gain untold power by 
working on people’s unrealized desire for a kind of promiscuous and 
pagan unity. 

Remember too that the most effective cults mix religion with science. 
Take the latest technological trend or fad and blend it with a noble cause, a 
mystical faith, a new form of healing. People’s interpretations of your hy¬ 
brid cult will run rampant, and they will attribute powers to you that you 
had never even thought to claim. 


Image: The Magnet. An unseen force draws objects to it, 
which in turn become magnetized themselves, drawing other 
pieces to them, the magnetic power of toe whole constantly 
increasing. But take away the original magnet and it all falls 
apart. Become the magnet, the invisible force that attracts 
people’s imaginations and holds them together. Once they 
have clustered around you, no power can wrest them away. 


Authority: The charlatan achieves his great power by simply opening 
a possibility for men to believe what they already want to believe.... 
The credulous cannot keep at a distance; they crowd around the 
wonder worker, entering his personal aura, surrendering themselves 
to illusion with a heavy solemnity, like cattle. (Crete de Francesco) 



REVERSAL 

One reason to create a following is that a group is often easier to deceive 
than an individual, and turns over to you that much more power. This 
comes, however, with a danger: If at any moment the group sees through 
you, you will find yourself facing not one deceived soul but an angry crowd 
that will tear you to pieces as avidly as it once followed you. The charlatans 
constandy faced this danger, and were always ready to move out of town as 
it inevitably became clear that their elixirs did not work and their ideas 
were sham. Too slow and they paid with their lives. In playing with the 
crowd, you are playing with fire, and must constantly keep an eye out for 
any sparks of doubt, any enemies who will turn the crowd against you. 
When you play with the emotions of a crowd, you have to know how to 
adapt, attuning yourself instantaneously to all of the moods and desires that 
a group will produce. Use spies, be on top of everything, and keep your 
bags packed. 

For this reason you may often prefer to deal with people one by one. 
Isolating them from their normal milieu can have the same effect as putting 
them in a group—it makes them more prone to suggestion and intimida¬ 
tion, Choose the right sucker and if he eventually sees through you he may 
prove easier to escape than a crowd. 


226 


LAW 27 



LAW 



ENTER ACTION 
WITH BOLDNESS 


JUDGMENT 

If you are unsure of a course of action , do not attempt it. 
Your doubts and hesitations will inject your execution. 
Timidity is dangerous: Better to enter with boldness . Any 
mistakes you commit through audacity are easily cor- 
reded with more audacity . Everyone admires the bold; no 
one honors the timid . 



Tilt; Tfto ad\ ivvri HKUs 

The path of pleasure 
never leads to glory, 1 
The prodigious 
achievements of 
Hercules were, the 
result of high adven¬ 
ture, and though there 
is little, either in fable 
or history, to show that 
he had any rivals ; still it 
is recorded that a 
knight errant, in 
company with a fellow 
adventurer, sought his 
fortune in a romantic 
country. He had not 
traveled far when his 
companion observed a 
post, on which was 
written the following 
inscription ; "Brave 
adventurer, if you have 
a desire to discover that 
which has never been 
seen by any knight 
errant, you have only 
to pass this torrent , and 
then iake in your arms 
an elephant of stone 
and carry it in one 
breath to the summit of 
this mountain, whose 
noble head seems 
blended with the sky." 
‘‘But,’’said the knight’s 
companion, "the water 
may be deep as well as 
rapid, and though, 
notwithstanding, we 
should pass it, why 
should we be encum¬ 
bered with the 
elephant? What a 
ridiculous undertak¬ 
ingAnd philosophi¬ 
cally and with nice 
calculation, he 
observed that the 
elephant might he 
carried four steps; hut 
for conveying it to the 
top of the mountain in 
one breath, that, was 
not in the power of a 
mortal, unless it should 


BOLDNESS AND HESITATION: A Brief Psychological Comparison 
Boldness and hesitation elicit very different psychological responses in their 
targets: Hesitation puts obstacles in your path, boldness eliminates them. 
Once you understand this, you will find it essential to overcome your nat¬ 
ural timidity and practice the art of audacity. The following are among the 
most pronounced psychological effects of boldness and timidity. 

The Bolder the Lie the Better, We all have weaknesses, and our efforts 
are never perfect. But entering action with boldness has the magical effect 
of hiding our deficiencies. Con artists know that the bolder the lie, the 
more convincing it becomes. The sheer audacity of the story makes it more 
credible, distracting attention from its inconsistencies. When putting to¬ 
gether a con or entering any kind of negotiation, go further than you 
planned. Ask for the moon and you will be surprised how often you get it. 

Lions Circle the Hesitant Prey. People have a sixth sense for the weak¬ 
nesses of others. If, in a first encounter, you demonstrate your willingness 
to compromise, back down, and retreat, you bring out the lion even in peo¬ 
ple who are not necessarily bloodthirsty. Everything depends on percep¬ 
tion, and once you are seen as the kind of person who quickly goes on the 
defensive, who is willing to negotiate and be amenable, you will be pushed 
around without mercy. 

Boldness Strikes Fear; Fear Creates Authority. The bold move makes 
you seem larger and more powerful than you are. If it comes suddenly, 
with the stealth and swiftness of a snake, it inspires that much more fear. By 
intimidating with a bold move, you establish a precedent: in every subse¬ 
quent encounter, people will be on the defensive, in terror of your next 
strike. 

Going Halfway with Half a Heart Digs the Deeper Grave. If you 

enter an action with less than total confidence, you set up obstacles in your 
own path. When a problem arises you will grow confused, seeing options 
where there are none and inadvertently creating more problems still. Re¬ 
treating from the hunter, the timid hare scurries more easily into his snares. 

Hesitation Creates Gaps, Boldness Obliterates Them. When you take 
time to think, to hem and haw, you create a gap that allows others time to 
think as well. Your timidity infects people with awkward energy, elicits em¬ 
barrassment Doubt springs up on all sides. 

Boldness destroys such gaps. The swiftness of the move and the energy 
of the action leave others no space to doubt and worry. In seduction, hesi¬ 
tation is fatal—it makes your victim conscious of your intentions. The bold 
move crowns seduction with triumph: It leaves no time for reflection. 

Audacity Separates You from the Herd. Boldness gives you presence 
and makes you seem larger than life. The timid fade into the wallpaper, the 


228 


LAW 28 



bold draw attention, and what draws attention draws power. We cannot 
keep our eyes off the audacious—we cannot wait to see their next bold 
move. 

OBSERVANCES OF THE LAW 
Observance I 

In May of 1925, five of the most successful dealers in the French scrap* 
metal business found themselves invited to an “official” but “highly confi¬ 
dential” meeting with the deputy director general of the Ministry of Post 
and Telegraphs at the Hotel Crillon, then the most luxurious hotel in Paris. 
When the businessmen arrived, it was the director general himself, a Mon¬ 
sieur Lustig, who met them in a swank suite on the top floor. 

The businessmen had no idea why they had been summoned to this 
meeting, and they were bursting with curiosity. After drinks, the director 
explained. “Gentlemen,” he said, “this is an urgent matter that requires 
complete secrecy. The government is going to have to tear down the Eiffel 
Tower.” The dealers listened in stunned silence as the director explained 
that the tower, as recently reported in the news, desperately needed re¬ 
pairs. It had originally been meant as a temporary structure (for the Expo¬ 
sition of 1889), its maintenance costs had soared over the years, and now, 
in a time of a fiscal crisis, the government would have to spend millions to 
fix it. Many Parisians considered the Eiffel Tower an eyesore and would be 
delighted to see it go. Over time, even the tourists would forget about it—it 
would live on in photographs and postcards. “Gentlemen,” Lustig said, 
“you are all invited to make the government an offer for the Eiffel Tower.” 

He gave the businessmen sheets of government stationery filled with 
figures, such as the tonnage of the tower’s metal. Their eyes popped as they 
calculated how much they could make from the scrap. Then Lustig led 
them to a waiting limo, which brought them to the Eiffel Tower. Flashing 
an official badge, he guided them through the area, spicing his tour with 
amusing anecdotes. At the end of the visit he thanked them and asked 
them to have their offers delivered to his suite within four days. 

Several days after the offers were submitted, one of the five, a Mon¬ 
sieur P,, received notice that his bid was the winner, and that to secure the 
sale he should come to the suite at the hotel within two days, bearing a cer¬ 
tified check for more than 250,000 francs (the equivalent today of about 
$1,000,000)—a quarter of the total price. On delivery of the check, he 
would receive the documents confirming his ownership of the Eiffel Tower. 
Monsieur P. was excited—he would go down in history as the man who 
had bought and tom down the infamous landmark. But by the time he ar¬ 
rived at the suite, check in hand, he was beginning to have doubts about 
the whole affair. Why meet in a hotel instead of a government building? 
Why hadn’t he heard from other officials? Was this a hoax, a scam? As he 
listened to Lustig discuss the arrangements for the scrapping of the tower, 
he hesitated, and contemplated backing out. 


be the dwarf figure of 
an elephant, fit only to 
be placed on the top of 
a stick; and then what 
honor would there be 
in such an adventure? 
u There is,”said he, 
"some deception in this 
writing. It is an enigma 
only fit to amuse a 
child. I shall therefore 
leave you and your 
elephant. ” 

The reasoner then 
departed; bur the 
adventurous man 
rushed with his eyes 
closed across the water; 
neither depth nor 
violence, prevented 
him, and according to 
the inscription he saw 
the elephant lying on 
the opposite bank. 

He took it and carried 
it to the top of the hilt, 
where he .sew a town. A 
shriek from the 
elephant alarmed the 
people of the city, who 
rose in arms: but the 
adventurer, nothing 
daunted, was deter¬ 
mined to die a hero. 

The people, however, 
were awed by his pres¬ 
ence, and he was aston¬ 
ished to hear them 
proclaim him successor 
to their king, who had 
recently died. 

Great enterprises are 
only achieved by 
adventurous spirits. 
'They who calculate 
with too great nicety 
every difficulty and 
obstacle which is likely 
to lie in their way, lose 
that time in hesitation, 
which the more daring 
seize and render avail¬ 
able to the loftiest 
purposes. 

FABLES, 

Jean de La Fontaine, 
1621-1695 


LAW 28 : 229 



Always set to work 
without misgivings on 
the score of impru¬ 
dence. Fear of failure 
in the mind of a 
performer is, for an 
onlooker, already 
evidence of failure ..., 
Actions are dangerous 
when there is doubt as 
to their wisdom; 
it would be safer 
to do nothing. 

B A IT AS A R G RAC l AN, 

16011658 


T! IK STOHY OF 

MCII sai;m. 

In a lowly thatched 
cottage in (he Namsan 
Valley there lived a 
poor couple, Mr. and 
Mrs. Huh Saeng. 
The husband confined 
himself for seven years 
and only read books in 
his cold room.... 
One day his wife, all in 
tears, said to him: 
"Look here; my good 
man! What is the use of 
all your hook reading? 
I have spent my youth 
in washing and sewing 
for other people and 
yet / have no spare 
jacket or skirt to wear 
and / have had no food 
to eat during the past 
three days. / am hungry 
and cold. } can stand 
it no more!” 
... Hearing these 
words, the middle-aged 
scholar closed his 
hook ... rose to his feet 
and ... without saying 
another word, he went 
out of doors ,... Arriv¬ 
ing in the heart of the 


Suddenly, however, he realized that die director had changed his tone. 
Instead of talking about the tower, he was complaining about his low 
salary, about his wife’s desire for a fur coat, about how galling it was to 
work hard and be unappreciated. It dawned on Monsieur P. that this high 
government official was asking for a bribe. The effect on him, though, was 
not outrage but relief. Now he was sure that Lustig was for real, since in all 
of his previous encounters with French bureaucrats, they had inevitably 
asked for a litde greasing of the palm. His confidence restored, Monsieur P. 
slipped the director several thousand francs in bills, then handed him the 
certified check. In return he received the documentation, including an im¬ 
pressive-looking bill of sale. He left the hotel, dreaming of the profits and 
fame to come. 

Over the next few days, however, as Monsieur P. waited for corre¬ 
spondence from the government, he began to realize that something was 
amiss. A few telephone calls made it clear that there was no deputy direc¬ 
tor general Lustig, and there were no plans to destroy the Eiffel Tower: He 
had been bilked of over 250,000 francs! 

Monsieur P. never went to the police. He knew what kind of reputa¬ 
tion he would get if word got out that he had fallen for one of the most ab¬ 
surdly audacious cons in history. Besides the public humiliation, it would 
have been business suicide. 

Interpretation 

Had Count Victor Lustig, con artist extraordinaire, tried to sell the Arc de 
Triomphe, a bridge over the Seine, a statue of Balzac, no one would have 
believed him. But the Eiffel Tower was just too large, too improbable to be 
part of a con job. In fact it was so improbable that Lustig was able to return 
to Paris six months later and “resell” the Eiffel Tower to a different scrap- 
iron dealer, and for a higher price—a sum in francs equivalent today to 
over $1,500,000! 

Largeness of scale deceives the human eye. It distracts and awes us, 
and is so self-evident that we cannot imagine there is any illusion or decep¬ 
tion afoot. Arm yourself with bigness and boldness—stretch your decep¬ 
tions as far as they will go and then go further. If you sense that the sucker 
has suspicions, do as the intrepid Lustig did: Instead of backing down, or 
lowering his price, he simply raised his price higher, by asking for and get¬ 
ting a bribe. Asking for more puts the other person on the defensive, cuts 
out the nibbling effect of compromise and doubt, and overwhelms with its 
boldness. 

Observance II 

On his deathbed in 1533, Vasily III, the Grand Duke of Moscow and ruler 
of a semi-united Russia, proclaimed his three-year-old son, Ivan IV, as his 
successor. He appointed his young wife, Helena, as regent until Ivan 
reached his majority and could rule on his own. The aristocracy—the bo¬ 
yars—secretly rejoiced: For years the dukes of Moscow had been trying to 
extend their authority over the boyars’ turf. With Vasily dead, his heir a 
mere three years old, and a young woman in charge of the dukedom, the 


230 : law 28 




boyars would be able to roll back the dukes’ gains, wrest control of the 
state, and humiliate the royal family. 

Aware of these dangers, young Helena turned to her trusted friend 
Prince Ivan Obolensky to help her rule. But after five years as regent she 
suddenly died—poisoned by a member of the Shuisky family, the most 
fearsome boyar clan. The Shuisky princes seized control of the govern¬ 
ment and threw Obolensky in prison, where he starved to death. At die age 
of eight, Ivan was now a despised orphan, and any boyar or family mem¬ 
ber who took an interest in him was immediately banished or killed. 

And so Ivan roamed the palace, hungry, ill clothed, and often in hid¬ 
ing from the Shuiskys, who treated him roughly when they saw him. On 
some days they would search him out, clothe him in royal robes, hand him 
a scepter, and set him on the throne—-a kind of mock ritual in which they 
lampooned his royal pretensions. Then they would shoo him away. One 
evening several of them chased the Metropolitan—the head of the Russian 
church—through the palace, and he sought refuge in Ivan’s room; the boy 
watched in horror as the Shuiskys entered, hurled insults, and beat the 
Metropolitan mercilessly. 

Ivan had one friend in the palace, a boyar named Vorontsov who con¬ 
soled and advised him. One day, however, as he, Vorontsov, and the 
newest Metropolitan conferred in the palace refectory, several Shuiskys 
burst in, beat up Vorontsov, and insulted the Metropolitan by tearing and 
treading on his robes. Then they banished Vorontsov from Moscow. 

Throughout all this Ivan maintained a strict silence. To the boyars it 
seemed that their plan had worked: The young man had turned into a ter¬ 
rified and obedient idiot. They could ignore him now, even leave him 
alone. But on the evening of December 29,1543, Ivan, now thirteen, asked 
Prince Andrei Shuisky to come to his room. When tire prince arrived, the 
room was filled with palace guards. Young Ivan then pointed his finger at 
Andrei and ordered the guards to arrest him, have him killed, and throw 
his body to the bloodhounds in the royal kennel. Over the next few days 
Ivan had all of Andrei’s close associates arrested and banished. Caught off¬ 
guard by his sudden boldness, the boyars now stood in mortal terror of this 
youth, the future Ivan the Terrible, who had planned and waited for five 
years to execute this one swift and bold act that would secure his power for 
decades to come, 

Interpretation 

The world is full of boyars—men who despise you, fear your ambition, and 
jealously guard their shrinking realms of power. You need to establish your 
authority and gain respect, but the moment the boyars sense your growing 
boldness, they will act to thwart you. This is how Ivan met such a situation: 
He lay low, showing neither ambition nor discontent. He waited, and when 
the time came he brought the palace guards over to his side. The guards 
had come to hate the cruel Shuiskys. Once they agreed to Ivan’s plan, he 
struck with the swiftness of a snake, pointing his finger at Shuisky and giv¬ 
ing him no time to react 

Negotiate with a boyar and you create opportunities for him. A small 


city, he stopped a pass¬ 
ing gentleman. “Hello, 
my friendf Who is the 
richest man tn town? " 
"Poor countryman' 
Don't you know Bydn- 
ssi, the. millionaire? His 
glittering tile-roofed 
house pierced by twelve 
gates is just over there. 
Huh Saeng bent his 
steps to the rich man's 
house. Having entered 
the big gate . he flung 
the guest-room door 
open and addressed (he 
host :"/ need 10,000 
yang for capital for my 
commercial business 
and I want you to tend 
me the. money. ” 

Alright, sir. Where 
shall l send the 
money?” 

"To the Ansang Market 
in care of a commis¬ 
sion merchant." 

" Very welt, sir. / wilt 
draw on Kim, who 
does the biggest 
commission business in 
the Ansdng Market. 
YoiTll get the money 
there” 

"Good-bye, sir ” 

When Huh Saeng w 
gone, all the other 
guests in the room 
asked Byon-ssi why he 
gave so much money to 
a beggarlike stranger 
whose family name was 
unknown to him . But 
the rich man replied 
with a triumphant face: 
“ Even though he was 
in ragged clothes, he 
spoke clearly to the. 
point without betraying 
shame or inferiority, 
unlike, common people 
who want to borrow 
money for a bad debt. 
Such a man as he is 
either mad or self- 
confident in doing 
business. But judging 
from his dauntless eyes 
and booming voice he 

LAW 28 23J 



is an uncommon man 
with a superhuman 
brain, worthy of my 
trust. / know money 
and / know men. 
Money often makes a 
man small, but a man 
like him makes big 
money. / am only glad 
to have helped a big 
man do big business.” 

BEHIND THE SCENES 
OK ROTAl. PALACES 
IN KOREA, 

Ha Tae-hunc, 
1983 


Fear ; which always 
magnifies objects, gives 
a body to all their 
fancies, which takes for 
its form whatever they 
conceive to exist in 
their enemies' thoughts: 
so that fearful persons 
seldom fall to fall into 
real incon veniences, 
occasioned by imagi¬ 
nary dangers ..., And 
the duke , whose 
predominant character 
was to be always full of 
fear and of distrust, 
was, of all men / have 
ever seen, the most 
capable of failing into 
false steps, by the dread 
he had of failing into 
them; being in that like 
unto hares. 

Cardinal he Ret?., 
1633-1679 


compromise becomes the toehold he needs to tear you apart. The sudden 
bold move, without discussion or warning, obliterates these toeholds, and 
builds your authority. You terrify doubters and despisers and gain the con¬ 
fidence of the many who admire and glorify those who act boldly. 

Observance III 

In 1514 the twenty-two-year-old Pietro Aretino was working as a lowly as¬ 
sistant scullion to a wealthy Roman family. He had ambitions of greatness 
as a writer, to enflame the world with his name, but how could a mere 
lackey hope to realize such dreams? 

That year Pope Leo X received from the king of Portugal an embassy 
that included many gifts, most prominent among them a great elephant, 
the first in Rome since imperial times. The pontiff adored this elephant and 
showered it with attention and gifts. But despite his love and care, the ele¬ 
phant, which was called Hanno, became deathly ill. The pope summoned 
doctors, who administered a five-hundred-pound purgative to the ele¬ 
phant, but all to no avail. The animal died and the pope went into mourn¬ 
ing. To console himself he summoned the great painter Raphael and 
ordered him to create a life-sized painting of Hanno above the animal’s 
tomb, bearing the inscription, “What nature took away, Raphael has with 
his art restored.” 

Over the next few days, a pamphlet circulated throughout Rome that 
caused great merriment and laughter. Entitled “The Last Will and Testa¬ 
ment of the Elephant Hanno,” it read, in part, “To my heir the Cardinal 
Santa Croce, I give my knees, so that he can imitate my genuflections. .., 
To my heir Cardinal Santi Quattro, I give my jaws, so that he can more 
readily devour all of Christ’s revenues. ... To my heir Cardinal Medici, I 
give my ears, so that he can hear everyone’s doings. ...” To Cardinal 
Grassi, who had a reputation for lechery, die elephant bequeathed the ap¬ 
propriate, oversized part of his own anatomy. 

On and on the anonymous pamphlet went, sparing none of the great 
in Rome, not even the pope. With each one it took aim at their best-known 
weakness. The pamphlet ended with verse, “See to it that Aretino is your 
friend / For he is a bad enemy to have. / His words alone could ruin the 
high pope / So God guard everyone from his tongue.” 

Interpretation 

With one short pamphlet, Aretino, son of a poor shoemaker and a servant 
himself, hurled himself to fame. Everyone in Rome rushed to find out who 
this daring young man was. Even the pope, amused by his audacity, sought 
him out and ended up giving him a job in the papal service. Over the years 
he came to be knowm as the “Scourge of Princes,” and his biting tongue 
earned him the respect and fear of the great, from the king of France to the 
Hapsburg emperor. 

The Aretino strategy is simple: When you are as small and obscure as 
David was, you must find a Goliath to attack. The larger the target, the 
more attention you gain. The bolder the attack, the more you stand out 


232 


LAW 28 




from the crowd, and the more admiration you earn. Society is full of those 
who think daring thoughts hut lack the guts to print and publicize them. 
Voice what the public feels—the expression of shared feelings is always 
powerful. Search out the most prominent target possible and sling your 
boldest shot. The world will enjoy the spectacle, and will honor the under¬ 
dog—you, that is—with glory and power. 


KEYS TO POWER 

Most of us are timid. We want to avoid tension and conflict and we want to 
be liked by all. We may contemplate a bold action but we rarely bring it to 
life. We are terrified of the consequences, of what others might think of us, 
of die hostility we will stir up if we dare go beyond our usual place. 

Although we may disguise our timidity as a concern for others, a de¬ 
sire not to hurt or offend them, in fact it is the opposite—we are really self- 
absorbed, worried about ourselves and how others perceive us. Boldness, 
on the other hand, is outer-directed, and often makes people feel more at 
ease, since it is less self-conscious and less repressed. 

This can be seen most clearly in seduction. All great seducers succeed 
through effrontery. Casanova’s boldness was not revealed in a daring ap¬ 
proach to the woman he desired, or in intrepid words to flatter her; it con¬ 
sisted in his ability to surrender himself to her completely and to make her 
believe he would do anything for her, even risk his life, which in fact he 
sometimes did. The woman on whom he lavished this attention under¬ 
stood that he held nothing back from her. This was infinitely more flatter¬ 
ing than compliments. At no point during the seduction would he show 
hesitation or doubt, simply because he never felt it. 

Part of the charm of being seduced is that it makes us feel engulfed, 
temporarily outside of ourselves and the usual doubts that permeate our 
lives. The moment the seducer hesitates, the charm is broken, because we 
become aware of the process, of their deliberate effort to seduce us, of 
their self-consciousness. Boldness directs attention outward and keeps 
the illusion alive. It never induces awkwardness or embarrassment. And 
so we admire the bold, and prefer to be around them, because their self- 
confidence infects us and draws us outside our own realm of inwardness 
and reflection. 

Few are bom bold. Even Napoleon had to cultivate the habit on the 
battlefield, where he knew it was a matter of life and death. In social set¬ 
tings he was awkward and timid, but he overcame this and practiced bold¬ 
ness in every part of his life because he saw its tremendous power, how it 
could literally enlarge a man (even one who, like Napoleon, was in fact 
conspicuously small). We also see this change in Ivan the Terrible: A harm¬ 
less boy suddenly transforms himself into a powerful young man who com¬ 
mands authority, simply by pointing a finger and taking bold action. 

You must practice and develop your boldness. You will often find uses 
for it. The best place to begin is often the delicate world of negotiation, par- 


THL BOY AND 
THE NETTLE 

A boy playing in the 
fields got stung by a 
nettle. He ran home to 
his mother, telling her 
that he had but touched 
that nasty weed, and it 
had stung him . “It was 
fust your touching it, 
my boy, ” said the 
mother ; “that caused it 
to sting you; the next 
time you meddle, with a 
nettle, grasp it tightly, 
and it will do you 
no hurt. ” 

Do boldly what you do 
at all. 

FABl.ES, 

Aesop, 

SIXTH CENTURY B.C. 


HOW TO BE 
VICTORIOUS IN LOVE 

But with those who 
have made an impres¬ 
sion upon your heart, l 
have noticed that you 
are. timid. This quality 
might affect a bour- 
geoise, but you must 
attack the heart of a 
woman o f the world 
with other weapons.... 
/ tell you on behalf of 
women: there is not one 
of us who does not 
prefer a little rough 
handling to too much 
consideration. Men 
lose through blunder¬ 
ing more hearts than 
virtue saves. The more 
timidity a lover shows 
with us the more it 
concerns our pride to 
goad him on; the. more 
respect he has for our 


LAW 28 ! 233 




resistance, the more 
respect we demand of 
hint. We would will¬ 
ingly say to you men: 
"Ah, in pity’s name do 
not suppose us to be so 
very virtuous: you are 
forcing us to have too 
much of it ....” 
We are continually 
struggling to hide the. 

fact that we have 
permitted ourselves to 
be loved. Put a woman 
in a position to say that 
she has yielded only to 
a .species of violence, or 
to surprise: persuade 
her that you do not 
undervalue her, and / 
will answer for her 
heart. ...A little more 
boldness on your part 
would put you both at 
your ease. Do you 
remember what M. de 
la Rochefoucauld told 
you lately: “A reason¬ 
able man in love may 
act like a madman, 
but he should not 
and cannot act like 
an idiot/' 

UFE, LETTERS, AND 
E PJCUR £ A N PH ILOSO P H Y 
OP NINON »fc LENCLOS, 

Ninon de Lenclos, 
1620-1705 


ticularly those discussions in which you are asked to set your own price. 
How often we put ourselves down by asking for too little. When Christo¬ 
pher Columbus proposed that the Spanish court finance his voyage to the 
Americas, he also made the insanely bold demand that he be called 
“Grand Admiral of the Ocean,” The court agreed. The price he set was the 
price he received—he demanded to be treated with respect, and so he was. 
Henry Kissinger too knew that in negotiation, bold demands work better 
than starting off with piecemeal concessions and trying to meet the other 
person hallway. Set your value high, and then, as Count Lustig did, set it 
higher. 

Understand: If boldness is not natural, neither is timidity. It is an ac¬ 
quired habit, picked up out of a desire to avoid conflict. If timidity has 
taken hold of you, then, root it out Your fears of the consequences of a 
bold action are way out of proportion to reality, and in fact the conse¬ 
quences of timidity are worse. Your value is lowered and you create a self- 
fulfilling cycle of doubt and disaster. Remember. The problems created by 
an audacious move can be disguised, even remedied, by more and greater 
audacity. 


Image: The Lion and the 
Hare. The lion creates no 
gaps in his way—his 
movements are too 
swift, his jaws too quick 
and powerful. The 
timid hare will do any¬ 
thing to escape danger, 
but in its haste to 
retreat and flee, it backs 
into traps, hops smack 
into its enemies’ jaws. 


Authority: I certainly think that it is better to be impetuous than 
cautious, for fortune is a woman, and it is necessary, if you wish to 
master her, to conquer her by force; and it can be seen that she lets 
herself be overcome by the bold rather than by those who proceed 
coldly. And therefore, like a woman, she is always a friend to 
the young, because they are less cautious, fiercer, and master 
her with greater audacity. (Niccolo Machiavelli, 1469-1527) 


234 


LAW 28 



REVERSAL 

Boldness should never be the strategy behind all of your actions. It is a tac¬ 
tical instrument, to be used at the right moment. Plan and think ahead, and 
make the final element the bold move that will bring you success. In other 
words, since boldness is a learned response, it is also one that you learn to 
control and utilize at will. To go through life armed only with audacity 
would be tiring and also fatal. You would offend too many people, as is 
proven by those who cannot control their boldness. One such person was 
Lola Montez; her audacity brought her triumphs and led to her seduction 
of the king of Bavaria. But since she could never rein in her boldness, it 
also led to her downfall—-in Bavaria, in England, wherever she turned. It 
crossed the border between boldness and the appearance of cruelty, even 
insanity. Ivan the Terrible suffered the same fate: When the power of bold¬ 
ness brought him success, he stuck to it, to the point where it became a life¬ 
long pattern of violence and sadism. He lost the ability to tell when 
boldness was appropriate and when it was not. 

Timidity has no place in the realm of power; you wall often benefit, 
however, by being able to feign it. At that point, of course, it is no longer 
timidity but an offensive weapon: You are luring people in with your show 
of shyness, all the better to pounce on them boldly later. 



LAW 


29 

PLAN ALL THE WAY 
TO THE END 


JUDGMENT 

The ending is everything. Plan all the way to it, taking 
into account all the possible consequences , obstacles, and 
twists of fortune that might reverse your hard work and 
give the glory to others. By planning to the end you will 
not he overwhelmed by circumstances and you will know 
when to stop . Gently guide fortune and help determine 
the future by thinking far ahead. 



TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

In 1510 a ship set out from the island of Hispaniola (now Haiti and the 
Dominican Republic) for Venezuela, where it was to rescue a besieged 
Spanish colony. Several miles out of port, a stowaway climbed out of a 
provision chest: Vasco Nunez de Balboa, a noble Spaniard who had come 
to the New World in search of gold but had fallen into debt and had es¬ 
caped his creditors by hiding in the chest. 

Balboa had been obsessed with gold ever since Columbus had re¬ 
turned to Spain from his voyages with tales of a fabulous but as yet undis¬ 
covered kingdom called El Dorado. Balboa was one of the first 
adventurers to come in search of Columbus’s land of gold, and he had de¬ 
cided from the beginning that he would be the one to find it, through 
sheer audacity and single-mindedness. Now that he was free of his credi¬ 
tors, nothing would stop him. 

Unfortunately the ship’s owner, a wealthy jurist named Francisco Fer¬ 
nandez de Enciso, was furious when told of the stowaway, and he ordered 
that Balboa be left on the first island they came across. Before they found 
any island, however, Enciso received news that the colony he was to res¬ 
cue had been abandoned. This was Balboa’s chance. He told the sailors of 
his previous voyages to Panama, and of the rumors he had heard of gold 
in the area. The excited sailors convinced Enciso to spare Balboa’s life, 
and to establish a colony in Panama. Weeks later they named their new 
settlement “Darien.” 

Darien’s first governor was Enciso, but Balboa was not a man to let 
others steal the initiative. He campaigned against Enciso among the 
sailors, who eventually made it clear that they preferred him as governor. 
Enciso fled to Spain, fearing for his life. Months later, when a representa¬ 
tive of the Spanish crown arrived to establish himself as the new, official 
governor of Darien, he was turned away. On his return voyage to Spain, 
this man drowned; the drowning was accidental, but under Spanish law, 
Balboa had murdered the governor and usurped his position. 

Balboa’s bravado had got him out of scrapes before, but now his 
hopes of wealth and glory seemed doomed. To lay claim to El Dorado, 
should he discover it, he would need the approval of the Spanish king— 
which, as an outlaw, he would never receive. There was only one solution. 
Panamanian Indians had told Balboa of a vast ocean on the other side of 
the Central American isthmus, and had said that by traveling south upon 
this western coast, he would reach a fabulous land of gold, called by a 
name that to his ears sounded like “Bini.” Balboa decided he would cross 
the treacherous jungles of Panama and become the first European to bathe 
his feet in this new ocean. From there he would march on El Dorado. If he 
did this on Spain’s behalf, he would obtain the eternal gratitude of the 
king, and would secure his own reprieve—-only he had to act before Span¬ 
ish authorities came to arrest him. 

In 1513, then, Balboa set out, with 190 soldiers. Halfway across the 
isthmus (some ninety miles wide at that point), only sixty soldiers re- 


There are very few 
men—and they are. the 
exceptions'—who are 
able to think and feel 
beyond the present 
moment. 

Carl von Clausewitz, 
1780-1831 


Till-: TWO I’HOCS 

Two frogs dwelt in the 
same pool. The pool 
being dried up under 
the summer's heat, they 
left it, and set out 
together to seek 
another home. As they 
went along they 
chanced to pass a deep 
well , amply supplied 
with water, on seeing 
which one of the frogs 
said to the other: “Let 
us descend and make 
our abode in this well , 
it will furnish us with 
shelter and food." The. 
other replied with 
greater caution: 

“But suppose the water 
should fail us, how can 
we get out again from 
so great a depth?” 

Do nothing without a 
regard to the conse¬ 
quences. 

FABLES. 

Aesop, 

SIXTH CENTURY B.C. 


LAW 29 ; 237 



Look to the end, no 
matter what it is you 
are considering. Often 
enough, God gives a 
man a glimpse of 
happiness, and then 
utterly ruins him. 

THE HISTORIES, 

Herodotus, 

FIFTH CENTURY B.C. 


TUi: KINO. THE. STM. 
AIM) THE SURCKON 

In ancient times a king 
of Tartary was out 
walking with some of 
his noblemen. At the 
roadside was an abdal 
(a wandering Sufi), 
who cried out: 
“Whoever will give, me 
a hundred dinars, / will 
give him some 
good advice. '* 
The king stopped, and 
said: “Abdal, what is 
this good advice far a 
hundred dinars ? w 
“Sin" answered the 
abdal", "order the sum 
to be given to me, and l 
will tell it you immedi¬ 
ately. ” The king did so, 
expecting to hear some¬ 
thing extraordinary. 
The dervish said to 
him: “My advice is this: 

Never begin anything 
until you have reflected 
what will be. the end of 
it." At this the nobles 
and everyone else 
present laughed, saying 
that the abdal had been 
wise to ask for his 
money in advance. Hut 
the king said: “ You 
have no reason to 
laugh at the good 
advice this abdal has 
given me. No one is 


mained, many having succumbed to die harsh conditions—the blood¬ 
sucking insects, the torrential rainfall, fever. Finally, from a mountaintop, 
Balboa became the first European to lay eyes on the Pacific Ocean. Days 
later he marched in his armor into its waters, bearing the banner of Castile 
and claiming all its seas, lands, and islands in the name of die Spanish 
throne. 

Indians from the area greeted Balboa with gold, jewels, and precious 
pearls, the like of which he had never seen. When he asked where these 
had come from, the Indians pointed south, to the land of the Incas. But 
Balboa had only a few soldiers left For the moment, he decided, he 
should return to Darien, send the jewels and gold to Spain as a token 
of good will, and ask for a large army to aid him in the conquest of El 
Dorado. 

When news reached Spain of Balboa’s bold crossing of the isthmus, 
his discovery of the western ocean, and his planned conquest of Ei Do¬ 
rado, the former criminal became a hero. He was instantly proclaimed 
governor of the new land. But before the king and queen received word of 
his discovery, they had already sent a dozen ships, under the command of 
a man named Pedro Arias Davila, “Pedrarias,” with orders to arrest Bal¬ 
boa for murder and to take command of the colony. By the time Pedrarias 
arrived in Panama, he had learned that Balboa had been pardoned, and 
that he was to share the governorship with the former outlaw. 

All the same, Balboa felt uneasy. Gold was his dream, El Dorado his 
only desire. In pursuit of this goal he had nearly died many times over, 
and to share the wealth and glory with a newcomer would be intolerable. 
He also soon discovered that Pedrarias was a jealous, bitter man, and 
equally unhappy with the situation. Once again, the only solution for Bal¬ 
boa was to seize the initiative by proposing to cross the jungle with a 
larger army, carrying ship building materials and tools. Once on the Pa¬ 
cific coast, he would create an armada with which to conquer the Incas. 
Surprisingly enough, Pedrarias agreed to the plan—perhaps sensing it 
would never work. Hundreds died in this second march through the jun¬ 
gle, and the timber they carried rotted in the torrential rains, Balboa, as 
usual, was undaunted—no power in the world could thwart his plan—and 
on arriving at the Pacific he began to cut down trees for new lumber. But 
the men remaining to him were too few and too weak to mount an inva¬ 
sion, and once again Balboa had to return to Darien. 

Pedrarias had in any case invited Balboa back to discuss a new plan, 
and on the outskirts of the settlement, the explorer was met by Francisco 
Pizarro, an old friend who had accompanied him on his first crossing of 
the isthmus. But this was a trap: Leading one hundred soldiers, Pizarro 
surrounded his former friend, arrested him, and returned him to Pe¬ 
drarias, who tried him on charges of rebellion. A few days later Balboa’s 
head fell into a basket, along with those of his most trusted followers. 
Years later Pizarro himself reached Peru, and Balboa’s deeds were for¬ 
gotten. 


23$ \ LAW 29 




Interpretation 

Most men are ruled by the heart, not the head. Their plans are vague, and 
when they meet obstacles they improvise. But improvisation will only 
bring you as far as the next crisis, and is never a substitute for thinking 
several steps ahead and planning to the end. 

Balboa had a dream of glory and wealth, and a vague plan to reach it. 
Yet his bold deeds, and his discovery of the Pacific, are largely forgotten, 
for he committed what in the world of power is the ultimate sin: He went 
part way, leaving the door open for others to take over. A real man of 
power would have had the prudence to see the dangers in the distance— 
the rivals who would want to share in the conquests, the vultures that 
would hover once they heard the word “gold.” Balboa should have kept 
his knowledge of the Incas secret until after he had conquered Peru. Only 
then would his wealth, and his head, have been secure. Once Pedrarias ar¬ 
rived on the scene, a man of power and prudence would have schemed to 
kill or imprison him, and to take over the army he had brought for the 
conquest of Pern. But Balboa was locked in the moment, always reacting 
emotionally, never thinking ahead. 

What good is it to have the greatest dream in the world if others reap 
the benefits and the glory? Never lose your head over a vague, open- 
ended dream—plan to the end. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

In 1863 the Prussian premier Otto von Bismarck surveyed the chessboard 
of European power as it then stood. The main players were England, 
France, and Austria. Prussia itself was one of several states in the loosely 
allied German Federation. Austria, dominant member of the Federation, 
made sure that the other German states remained weak, divided and sub¬ 
missive. Bismarck believed that Prussia was destined for something far 
greater than servant boy to Austria. 

This is how Bismarck played the game. His first move was to start a 
war with lowly Denmark, in order to recover the former Prussian lands of 
Schleswig-Holstein. He knew that these rumblings of Prussian indepen¬ 
dence might worry France and England, so he enlisted Austria in the war, 
claiming that he was recovering Schleswig-Holstein for their benefit. In a 
few months, after the war was decided, Bismarck demanded that the 
newly conquered lands be made part of Prussia. The Austrians of course 
were furious, but they compromised: First they agreed to give the Prus¬ 
sians Schleswig, and a year later they sold them Holstein. The world 
began to see that Austria was weakening and that Prussia was on the rise. 

Bismarck’s next move was his boldest: In 1866 he convinced King 
William of Prussia to withdraw from the German Federation, and in doing 
so to go to war with Austria itself. King William’s wife, his son the crown 
prince, and the princes of the other German kingdoms vehemently op¬ 
posed such a war. But Bismarck, undaunted, succeeded in forcing the con¬ 
flict, and Prussia’s superior army defeated the Austrians in the brutally 


unaware of the fact that 
we should think well 
before doing anything. 
But we are daily guilty 
of not remembering, 
and the consequences 
are evil . J very much 
value this dervish is 
advice. ” 

The king decided to 
bear the advice always 
in his mind, and com¬ 
manded it to be. written 
in gold on the walls 
and even engraved on 
his silver plate . 

Not long afterward a 
plotter desired to kill 
the king. He bribed the 
royal surgeon with a 
promise of the prime 
ministership if he thrust 
a poisoned lancet into 
the. king's arm. When 
the time came to lei 
some of the king's 
blood, a stiver basin 
was placed to catch the 
blood. Suddenly the 
surgeon became aware 
of the. words engraved 
upon h: “Never begin 
anything until you have 
reflected what will be 
the. end of it. ” It was 
only then that he real¬ 
ized that if (he plotter 
became king he could 
have the surgeon killed 
instantly, and would 
not need to fulfill his 
bargain. 

The king, seeing that 
the surgeon was now 
trembling, asked him 
what was wrong with 
him. And so he 
confessed the truth, at 
that very moment. 

The plotter was seized; 
and the king sent for all 
the people who had 
been present when the 
abdal gave his advice, 
and said to them: “Do 
you still laugh at the 
dervish? " 

caravan of drf.ams, 

I dribs Shah, 1968 


LAW 29 239 



He who asks fortune- 
tellers the future 
unwittingly forfeits an 
inner intimation of 
coming events that is a 
thousand times more 
exact than anything 
they may say. 

Walter Benjamin. 

1892-1940 


short Seven Weeks Wax. The king and the Prussian generals then wanted 
to march on Vienna, taking as much land from Austria as possible. But 
Bismarck stopped them—now he presented himself as on the side of 
peace. The result was that he was able to conclude a treaty with Austria 
that granted Prussia and the other German states total autonomy. Bis¬ 
marck could now position Prussia as the dominant power in Germany and 
the head of a newly formed North German Confederation. 

The French and the English began to compare Bismarck to Attila the 
Hun, and to fear that he had designs on all of Europe. Once he had started 
on the path to conquest, there was no telling where he would stop. And, 
indeed, three years later Bismarck provoked a war with France. First he 
appeared to give his permission to France's annexation of Belgium, then 
at the last moment he changed his mind. Playing a cat-and-mouse game, 
he infuriated the French emperor, Napoleon III, and stirred up his own 
king against the French. To no one’s surprise, war broke out in 1870. The 
newly formed German federation enthusiastically joined in the war 
on France, and once again the Prussian military machine and its allies 
destroyed the enemy army in a matter of months. Although Bismarck 
opposed taking any French land, the generals convinced him that Alsace- 
Lorraine would become part of the federation. 

Now all of Europe feared the next move of the Prussian monster, led 
by Bismarck, the “Iron Chancellor.” And in fact a year later Bismarck 
founded the German Empire, with the Prussian king as the newly 
crowned emperor and Bismarck himself a prince. But then something 
strange happened: Bismarck instigated no more wars. And while the other 
European powers grabbed up land for colonies in other continents, he se¬ 
verely limited Germany’s colonial acquisitions. He did not want more 
land for Germany, but more security. For the rest of his life he struggled to 
maintain peace in Europe and to prevent further wars. Everybody as¬ 
sumed he had changed, mellowing with the years. They had failed to un¬ 
derstand: This was the final move of his original plan. 


Interpretation 

There is a simple reason why most men never know when to come off the 
attack: They form no concrete idea of their goal. Once they achieve vic¬ 
tory they only hunger for more. To stop—to aim for a goal and then keep 
to it—seems almost inhuman, in fact; yet nothing is more critical to the 
maintenance of power. The person who goes too far in his triumphs cre¬ 
ates a reaction that inevitably leads to a decline. The only solution is to 
plan for the long run. Foresee the future with as much clarity as the gods 
on Mount Olympus, who look through the clouds and see the ends of all 
things. 

From the beginning of his career in politics, Bismarck had one goal: 
to form an independent German state led by Prussia. He instigated the 
war with Denmark not to conquer territory but to stir up Prussian nation¬ 
alism and unite the country. He incited the war with Austria only to gain 


240 


LAW 2$) 



Prussian independence. (This was why he refused to grab Austrian terri¬ 
tory.) And he fomented the war with France to unite the German king¬ 
doms against a common enemy, and thus to prepare for the formation of a 
united Germany. 

Once tiiis was achieved, Bismarck stopped. He never let triumph go 
to his head, was never tempted by the siren cal! of more. He held the reins 
tightly, and whenever the generals, or the king, or the Prussian people de¬ 
manded new conquests, he held them back. Nothing would spoil the 
beauty of his creation, certainly not a false euphoria that pushed those 
around him to attempt to go past the end that he had so carefully planned. 

Experience shows that , if one foresees from far away the designs to be 
undertaken, one can act with speed when the moment comes to execute them, 
Cardinal Richelieu » 1583-1642 


KEYS TO POWER 

According to the cosmology of the ancient Greeks, the gods were thought 
to have complete vision into the future. They saw everything to come, 
right down to the intricate details. Men, on the other hand, were seen as 
victims of fate, trapped in the moment and their emotions, unable to see 
beyond immediate dangers. Those heroes, such as Odysseus, who were 
able to look beyond the present and plan several steps ahead, seemed to 
defy fate, to approximate the gods in their ability to determine the future. 
The comparison is still valid—those among us who think further ahead 
and patiently bring their plans to fruition seem to have a godlike power. 

Because most people are too imprisoned in the moment to plan with 
this kind of foresight, the ability to ignore immediate dangers and plea¬ 
sures translates into power. It is the power of being able to overcome the 
natural human tendency to react to things as they happen, and instead to 
train oneself to step back, imagining the larger things taking shape beyond 
one's immediate vision. Most people believe that they are in fact aware of 
the future, that they are planning and thinking ahead. They are usually de¬ 
luded: What they are really doing is succumbing to their desires, to what 
they want the future to be. Their plans are vague, based on their imagina¬ 
tions rather than their reality. They may believe they are thinking all the 
way to the end, but they are really only focusing on the happy ending, and 
deluding themselves by the strength of their desire. 

In 415 B.C., the ancient Athenians attacked Sicily, believing their ex¬ 
pedition would bring them riches, power, and a glorious ending to the six¬ 
teen-year Peloponnesian War. They did not consider the dangers of an 
invasion so far from home; they did not foresee that the Sicilians would 
fight all the harder since the battles were in their own homeland, or that 
all of Athens's enemies would band together against them, or that war 
would break out on several fronts, stretching their forces way too thin. 
The Sicilian expedition was a complete disaster, leading to the destruction 



of one of the greatest civilizations of all time. The Athenians were led into 
this disaster by their hearts, not their minds. They saw only the chance of 
glory, not the dangers that loomed in the distance. 

Cardinal de Retz, the seventeenth-century Frenchman who prided 
himself on his insights into human schemes and why they mostly fail, ana¬ 
lyzed this phenomenon. In the course of a rebellion he spearheaded 
against the French monarchy in 1651, the young king, l^ouis XIV, and his 
court had suddenly left Paris and established themselves in a palace out¬ 
side the capital. The presence of the king so close to the heart of the revo¬ 
lution had been a tremendous burden on the revolutionaries, and they 
breathed a sigh of relief. This later proved their downfall, however, since 
the court’s absence from Paris gave it much more room to maneuver. 
“The most ordinary cause of people’s mistakes,” Cardinal de Retz later 
wrote, “is their being too much frightened at the present danger, and not 
enough so at that which is remote.” 

The dangers that are remote, that loom in the distance—if we can see 
them as they take shape, how many mistakes we avoid. How many plans 
we would instantly abort if we realized we were avoiding a small danger 
only to step into a larger one. So much of power is not what you do but 
what you do not do—the rash and foolish actions that you refrain from be¬ 
fore they get you into trouble. Plan in detail before you act—do not let 
vague plans lead you into trouble. Will this have unintended conse¬ 
quences? Will I stir up new enemies? Will someone else take advantage of 
my labors? Unhappy endings are much more common than happy 
ones—do not be swayed by the happy ending in your mind. 

The French elections of 1848 came down to a struggle between Louis- 
Adolphe Thiers, the man of order, and General Louis Eugene Cavaignac, 
the rabble-rouser of the right When Thiers realized he was hopelessly be¬ 
hind in this high-stakes race, he searched desperately for a solution. His 
eye fell on Louis Bonaparte, grand-nephew of the great general Napoleon, 
and a lowly deputy in the parliament. This Bonaparte seemed a bit of an 
imbecile, but his name alone could get him elected in a country yearning 
for a strong ruler. He would be Thiers’s puppet and eventually would be 
pushed offstage. The first part of the plan worked to perfection, and 
Napoleon was elected by a large margin. The problem was that Thiers 
had not foreseen one simple fact: This “imbecile” was in fact a man of 
enormous ambition. Three years later he dissolved parliament, declared 
himself emperor, and ruled France for another eighteen years, much to 
the horror of Thiers and his party. 

The ending is everything. It is the end of the action that determines 
who gets the glory, the money, the prize. Your conclusion must be crystal 
clear, and you must keep it constantly in mind. You must also figure out 
how to ward off the vultures circling overhead, trying to live off the car¬ 
cass of your creation. And you must anticipate the many possible crises 
that will tempt you to improvise. Bismarck overcame these dangers be¬ 
cause he planned to the end, kept on course through every crisis, and 


242 


LAW 29 



never let others steal the glory. Once he had reached his stated goal, he 
withdrew into his shell like a turtle. This kind of self-control is godlike. 

When you see several steps ahead, and plan your moves all the way 
to the end, you will no longer be tempted by emotion or by the desire to 
improvise. Your clarity will rid you of the anxiety and vagueness that are 
the primary reasons why so many fail to conclude their actions success¬ 
fully. You see the ending and you tolerate no deviation. 


Image: 

The Gods on 
Mount Olympus. 

Looking down on 
human actions from the 
clouds, they see in advance the 
endings of all the great dreams that 
lead to disaster and tragedy. And 
they laugh at our inability to see beyond 
the moment, and at how we delude ourselves. 


Authority: How much easier it is never to get in than to get yourself 
out! We should act contrary to the reed which, when it first appears, 
throws up a long straight stem but afterwards, as though it were ex¬ 
hausted . . . makes several dense knots, indicating that it no longer 
has its original vigor and drive. We must rather begin gently and 
coolly, saving our breath for the encounter and our vigorous thrusts 
for finishing off the job. In their beginnings it is we who guide affairs 
and hold them in our power- but so often once they are set in motion, 
it is they which guide us and sweep us along. (Montaigne, 1533-1592) 



REVERSAL 

It is a cliche among strategists that your plan must include alternatives and 
have a degree of flexibility. That is certainly true. If you are locked into a 
plan too rigidly, you will be unable to deal with sudden shifts of fortune. 
Once you have examined the future possibilities and decided on your tar¬ 
get, you must build in alternatives and be open to new routes toward your 
goal. 

Most people, however, lose less from overplanning and rigidity than 
from vagueness and a tendency to improvise constantly in the face of cir¬ 
cumstance. There is no real purpose in contemplating a reversal to this 
Law, then, for no good can come from refusing to think far into the future 
and planning to the end. If you are clear- and far-thinking enough, you 
will understand that the future is uncertain, and that you must be open to 
adaptation. Only having a clear objective and a far-reaching plan allows 
you that freedom. 



LAW 



MAKE YOUR 
ACCOMPLISHMENTS 
SEEM EFFORTLESS 


JUDGMENT 

Your actions must seem natural and executed with ease . 
All the toil and practice that go into them, and also all 
the clever tricks, must be concealed, When you act; act ef¬ 
fortlessly t as if you could do much more . Avoid the temp¬ 
tation of revealing how hard you work—it only raises 
questions, Teach no one your tricks or they will be used 
against you. 



K.\XO TANiNYi 
MAS I KK ARTIST 


Date Masamune once 
sent for Tanrtyu to 
decorate a pair of gold 
screens seven feet high. 
The artist said he 
thought black-and- 
white sketches would 
suit them, and went 
home again after 
considering them care¬ 
fully. The next morning 
he came early and 
made a large quantity 
of ink into which he 
dipped a horseshoe he 
had brought with him, 
and then proceeded to 
make impressions of 
this all over one of the 
screens. Then , with a 
large brush, he drew a 
number of lines across: 
them. Meanwhile 
Masamune had come 
in to watch his work, 
and at this he could 
contain his irritation no 
longer, and muttering, 
"What a beastly mess'" 
he strode away to his 
own apartments. The 
retainers told fannyu 
he was in a very bad 
temper indeed. ‘'He 
shouldn't look on while 
/ am at work, then, ” 
replied the painter, "'he 
should wait (ill it is 
finished." Then he took 
up a smaller brush and 
dashed in touches here 
and (here, and as he did 
so (he prints of the 
horse-shoe turned into 
crabs, while the big 
broad strokes became 
rushes. He then turned 
to the other screen and 
splashed drops of ink 
all over it, and when he 
had added a few brush¬ 
strokes here and there 
they became a flight of 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I 

The Japanese tea ceremony called Cha-no-yu (“Hot Water for Tea”) has 
origins in ancient times, but it reached its peak of refinement in the six¬ 
teenth century under its most renowned practitioner, Sen no Rikyu. Al¬ 
though not from a noble family, Rikyu rose to great power, becoming the 
preferred tea master of the Emperor Hideyoshi, and an important adviser 
on aesthetic and even political matters. For Rikyu, the secret of success 
consisted in appearing natural, concealing the effort behind one’s work. 

One day Rikyu and his son went to an acquaintance’s house for a tea 
ceremony. On the way in, the son remarked that the lovely antique-look- 
ing gate at their host’s house gave it an evocatively lonely appearance. “I 
don’t think so,” replied his father, “it looks as though it had been brought 
from some mountain temple a long way off, and as if the labor required to 
import it must have cost a lot of money.” If the owner of the house had put 
this much effort into one gate, it would show in his tea ceremony—and in¬ 
deed Sen no Rikyu had to leave the ceremony early, unable to endure the 
affectation and effort it inadvertently revealed. 

On another evening, while having tea at a friend’s house, Rikyu saw 
his host go outside, hold up a lantern in the darkness, cut a lemon off a tree, 
and bring it in. This charmed Rikyu—the host needed a relish for the dish 
he was serving, and had spontaneously gone outside to get one. But when 
the man offered the lemon with some Osaka rice cake, Rikyu realized that 
he had planned the cutting of the lemon all along, to go with this expensive 
delicacy. The gesture no longer seemed spontaneous—it was a way for the 
host to prove his cleverness. He had accidentally revealed how hard he 
was trying. Having seen enough, Rikyu politely declined the cake, excused 
himself, and left. 

Emperor Hideyoshi once planned to visit Rikyu for a tea ceremony. 
On the night before he was to come, snow began to fall. Thinking quickly, 
Rikyu laid round cushions that fit exactly on each of the stepping-stones 
that led through the garden to his house. Just before dawn, he rose, saw 
that it had stopped snowing, and carefully removed the cushions. When 
Hideyoshi arrived, he marveled at the simple beauty of the sight—the per¬ 
fectly round stepping stones, imencumbered by snow—and noticed how it 
called no attention to the manner in which Rikyu had accomplished it, but 
only to the polite gesture itself. 

After Sen no Rikyu died, his ideas had a profound influence on the 
practice of the tea ceremony. The Tokugawa shogun Yorinobu, son of the 
great Emperor leyasu, was a student of Rikyu’s teachings. In his garden he 
had a stone lantern made by a famous master, and Lord Sakai Tadakatsu 
asked if he could come by one day to see it. Yorinobu replied that he would 
be honored, and commanded his gardeners to put everything in order for 
the visit. These gardeners, unfamiliar with the precepts of Cha-no~yu, 
thought the stone lantern misshapen, its windows being too small for the 
present taste. They had a local workman enlarge the windows. A few days 
before Lord Sakai’s visit, Yorinobu toured the garden. WTien he saw the al- 


246 \ LAW 30 




tered windows he exploded with rage, ready to impale on his sword the 
fool who had mined the lantern, upsetting its natural grace and destroying 
the whole purpose of Lord Sakai’s visit. 

When Yorinobu calmed down, however, he remembered that he had 
originally bought two of the lanterns, and that the second was in his garden 
on the island of Kishu. At great expense, he hired a whale boat and the 
finest rowers he could find, ordering them to bring the lantern to him 
within two days—a difficult feat at best. But the sailors rowed day and 
night, and with the luck of a good wind they arrived just in time. To Yori- 
nobu’s delight, this stone lantern was more magnificent than the first, for it 
had stood untouched for twenty years in a bamboo thicket, acquiring a 
brilliant antique appearance and a delicate covering of moss. When Lord 
Sakai arrived, later that same day, he was awed by the lantern, which was 
more magnificent than he had imagined—so graceful and at one with the 
elements. Fortunately he had no idea what time and effort it had cost Yori¬ 
nobu to create this sublime effect. 

Interpretation 

To Sen no Rikyu, the sudden appearance of something naturally, almost 
accidentally graceful was the height of beauty. This beauty came without 
warning and seemed effortless. Nature created such things by its own laws 
and processes, but men had to create their effects through labor and con¬ 
trivance. And when they showed the effort of producing the effect, die ef¬ 
fect was spoiled. The gate came from too far away, the cutting of the lemon 
looked contrived. 

You will often have to use tricks and ingenuity to create your effects— 
the cushions in the snow, the men rowing all night—but your audience 
must never suspect the work or the thinking that has gone into them. Na¬ 
ture does not reveal its tricks, and what imitates nature by appealing effort¬ 
less approximates nature’s power. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II 

The great escape artist Harry Houdini once advertised his act as “The Im¬ 
possible Possible.” And indeed those who witnessed his dramatic escapes 
felt that what he did onstage contradicted commonsense ideas of human 
capacity'. 

One evening in 1904, an audience of 4,000 Londoners filled a theater 
to watch Houdini accept a challenge: to escape from a pair of manacles 
billed as the strongest ever invented. They contained six sets of locks and 
nine tumblers in each cuff; a Birmingham maker had spent five years con¬ 
structing them. Experts who examined them said they had never seen any¬ 
thing so intricate, and this intricacy was thought to make them impossible 
to escape. 

The crowd watched the experts secure the manacles on Houdini’s 
wrists. Then the escape artist entered a black cabinet on stage. The minutes 


swallows over willow 
trees. When Mas aniline 
saw the finished work 
he was as overjoyed at 
the artist's skill as he 
had previously been 
annoyed at the appar¬ 
ent mess he 
making of the screens, 

CHA-NO-YU: 

THE JAPANESE TEA 
CEREMONY 

A. L. Sadler.. 1.962 


Till'. WKi STUNC 
MAHTKtt 

There was once a 
wrestling master who 
was versed in 360 feints 
and holds. He took a 
special liking to one of 
his pupils, to whom he 
taught 359 of (hern over 
a period of time. Some¬ 
how he never got 
around to the last trick. 
As months went by the 
young man became so 
proficient in the art that 
he bested everyone who 
dared to face him in the 
ring. He was so proud 
of his prowess that one 
day he boasted before 
the sultan that he could 
readily whip his master, 
were it not out of 
respect for his age and 
gratitude for his 
tutelage. 

The sultan became 
incensed at this irrever¬ 
ence and ordered an 
immediate mutch with 
the royal court in 
attendance. 

At the gong the youth 
barged forward with a 
lusty yell, only to be 
confronted with the 
unfamiliar 360th feint. 


LAW 30 


247 



The master seized his 
former pupil, lifted him 
high above his head, 
and flung him crashing 
to the ground. The 
sultan and ike assem¬ 
bly let out a loud cheer. 
When the sultan asked 
the master how he 
able to overcome such 
a strong opponent, the 
master confessed that 
he had reserved a secret 
technique for himself 
for just such a contin¬ 
gency. Then he related 
the lamentation of a 
master of archery, who 
taught everything he 
knew. "No one has 
learned archery from 
me," the poor fellow 
complained, “who has 
not tried to use me as a 
butt in the end. ” 

A story Of* Saadi, 
AS TOLD IN 
THE CRAFT OF POWER, 

K.G.B. $10,1979 


went by; the more time passed, the more certain it seemed that these man¬ 
acles would be the first to defeat him. At one point he emerged from the 
cabinet, and asked that the cuffs be temporarily removed so that he could 
take off his coat—it was hot inside. The challengers refused, suspecting his 
request was a trick to find out how the locks worked. Undeterred, and with¬ 
out using his hands, Houdini managed to lift the coat over his shoulders, 
turn it inside out, remove a penknife from his vest pocket with his teeth, 
and, by moving his head, cut the coat off his arms. Freed from the coat, he 
stepped back into the cabinet, the audience roaring with approval at his 
grace and dexterity. 

Finally, having kept the audience waiting long enough, Houdini 
emerged from the cabinet a second time, now with his hands free, die man¬ 
acles raised high in triumph. To this day no one knows how he managed 
the escape. Although he had taken close to an hour to free himself, he had 
never looked concerned, had shown no sign of doubt. Indeed it seemed by 
the end that he had drawn out the escape as a way to heighten the drama, 
to make the audience worry—for there was no other sign that the perfor¬ 
mance had been anything but easy. The complaint about the heat was 
equally part of the act. The spectators of this and other Houdini perfor¬ 
mances must have felt he was toying with them: These manacles are noth¬ 
ing, he seemed to say, I could have freed myself a lot sooner, and from a 
lot worse. 

Over the years, Houdini escaped from the chained carcass of an em¬ 
balmed “sea monster’ 5 (a half octopus, half whalelike beast that had 
beached near Boston); he had himself sealed inside an enormous envelope 
from which he emerged without breaking the paper; he passed through 
brick walls; he wriggled free from strait]ackets while dangling high in the 
air; he leaped from bridges into icy waters, his hands manacled and his legs 
in chains; he had himself submerged in glass cases frill of water, hands pad¬ 
locked, while the audience watched in amazement as he worked himself 
free, struggling for close to an hour apparently without breathing. Each 
time he seemed to court certain death yet survived with superhuman 
aplomb. Meanwhile, he said nothing about his methods, gave no clues as 
to how he accomplished any of his tricks-—he left his audiences and critics 
speculating, his power and reputation enhanced by their struggles with the 
inexplicable. Perhaps the most baffling trick of all was making a ten-thou¬ 
sand-pound elephant disappear before an audience’s eyes, a feat he re¬ 
peated on stage for over nineteen weeks. No one has ever really explained 
how he did this, for in the auditorium where he performed the hick, there 
was simply nowhere for an elephant to hide. 

The effortlessness of Houdini’s escapes led some to think he used oc¬ 
cult forces, his superior psychic abilities giving him special control over his 
body. But a German escape artist named Kleppini claimed to know Hou¬ 
dini’s secret: He simply used elaborate gadgets. Kleppini also claimed to 
have defeated Houdini in a handcuff challenge in Holland. 

Houdini did not mind all kinds of speculation floating around about 


248 


LAW 30 



his methods, but he would not tolerate an outright lie, and in 1902 he chal¬ 
lenged Kleppini to a handcuff duel Kleppini accepted. Through a spy, he 
found out the secret word to unlock a pair of French combination-lock 
cuffs that Houdini liked to use. His plan was to choose these cuffs to escape 
from onstage. This would definitively debunk Houdini—his “genius” sim¬ 
ply lay in his use of mechanical gadgets. 

On the night of the challenge, just as Kleppini had planned, Houdini 
offered him a choice of cuffs and he selected the ones with the combination 
lock. He was even able to disappear with them behind a screen to make a 
quick test, and reemerged seconds later, confident of victory. 

Acting as if he sensed fraud, Houdini refused to lock Kleppini in the 
cuffs. The two men argued and began to fight, even wrestling with each 
other onstage. After a few minutes of this, an apparently angry, frustrated 
Houdini gave up and locked Kleppini in the cuffs. For the next few minutes 
Kleppini strained to get free. Something was wrong—minutes earlier he 
had opened the cuffs behind the screen; now the same code no longer 
worked. He sweated, racking his brains. Hours went by, the audience left, 
and finally an exhausted and humiliated Kleppini gave up and asked to be 
released. 

The cuffs that Kleppini himself had opened behind the screen with the 
word “ C-L-E-F-S ” (French for “keys”) now clicked open only with the 
word “F-R-A-U-D .”Kleppini never figured out how Houdini had accom¬ 
plished this uncanny feat. 

Interpretation 

Although we do not know for certain how Houdini accomplished many of 
his most ingenious escapes, one thing is clear: It was not the occult, or any 
kind of magic, that gave him his powers, but hard work and endless prac¬ 
tice, all of which he carefully concealed from the world. Houdini never left 
anything to chance—day and night he studied the workings of locks, re¬ 
searched centuries-old sleight-of-hand tricks, pored over books on mechan¬ 
ics, whatever he could use. Every moment not spent researching he spent 
working his body, keeping himself exceptionally limber, and learning how 
to control his muscles and his breathing. 

Early on in Houdini’s career, an old Japanese performer whom he 
toured with taught him an ancient trick: how to swallow an ivory ball, then 
bring it back up. He practiced this endlessly with a small peeled potato tied 
to a string—up and down he would manipulate the potato with his throat 
muscles, until they were strong enough to move it without the string. The 
organizers of the London handcuff challenge had searched Houdini’s body 
thoroughly beforehand, but no one could check the inside of his throat, 
where he could have concealed small tools to help him escape. Even so, 
Kleppini was fundamentally wrong: It was not Houdini’s tools but his prac¬ 
tice, work, and research that made his escapes possible. 

Kleppini, in fact, was completely outwitted by Houdini, who set the 
whole thing up. He let his opponent learn the code to the French cuffs, 


Keep the extent of your 
abilities unknown. The 
wise man does not 
allow his knowledge 
and abilities to be 
sounded to the bottom, 
i f he desires to be 
honored by all. He 
allows you to know 
them but not to 
comprehend them. No 
one must know the 
extent of his abilities, 
lest he be disappointed. 
No one ever has an 
opportunity of fathom¬ 
ing him entirely. For 
guesses and doubts 
about the extent of his 
talents arouse, more 
veneration than accu¬ 
rate knowledge of 
them, be they ever so 
great. 

Baltasar GraciAn, 
1601-1658 


LAW 30 


249 



then baited him into choosing those cuffs onstage. Then, during the two 
men’s tussle, the dexterous Houdini was able to change the code to “F R¬ 
AUD. ” He had spent weeks practicing this trick, but the audience saw 
none of the sweat and toil behind the scenes. Nor was Houdini ever ner¬ 
vous; he induced nervousness in others. (He deliberately dragged out the 
time it would take to escape, as a way of heightening the drama, and mak¬ 
ing the audience squirm.) His escapes from death, always graceful and 
easy, made him look like a superman. 

As a person of power, you must research and practice endlessly before 
appearing in public, onstage or anywhere else. Never expose the sweat and 
labor behind your poise. Some think such exposure will demonstrate their 
diligence and honesty, but it actually just makes them look weaker—as if 
anyone who practiced and worked at it could do what they had done, or as 
if they weren’t really up to the job. Keep your effort and your tricks to 
yourself and you seem to have the grace and ease of a god. One never sees 
the source of a god’s power revealed; one only sees its effects. 

A line [of poetry] xvill take us hours maybe; 

Yet if it does not seem a moment's thought. 

Our stitching and unstitching has been naught. 

Adam's Curse, William Butler Yeats, 1865 1939 


KEYS TO POWER 

Humanity’s first notions of power came from primitive encounters with na¬ 
ture—the flash of lightning in the sky, a sudden flood, the speed and feroc¬ 
ity of a wild animal. These forces required no thinking, no planning—they 
awed us by their sudden appearance, their gracefulness, and their power 
over life and death. And this remains the kind of power we have always 
wanted to imitate. Through science and technology we have re-created the 
speed and sublime power of nature, but something is missing: Our ma¬ 
chines are noisy and jerky, they reveal their effort. Even the very best cre¬ 
ations of technology cannot root out our admiration for things that move 
easily and effortlessly. The power of children to bend us to their will comes 
from a kind of seductive charm that we feel in the presence of a creature 
less reflective and more graceful than we are. We cannot return to such a 
state, but if we can create the appearance of this kind of ease, we elicit in 
others the kind of primitive awe that nature has always evoked in hu¬ 
mankind. 

One of the first European writers to expound on this principle came 
from that most unnatural of environments, the Renaissance court. In The 
Book of the Courtier , published in 1528, Baldassare Castiglione describes the 
highly elaborate and codified manners of the perfect court citizen. And yet, 
Castiglione explains, the courtier must execute these gestures with what he 
calls sprezzfliura, the capacity to make the difficult seem easy. He urges the 
courtier to “practice in all things a certain nonchalance which conceals all 



artistry and makes whatever one says or does seem uncontrived and effort¬ 
less.* We all admire the achievement of some unusual feat, but if it is ac¬ 
complished naturally and gracefully, our admiration increases tenfold— 
“whereas ... to labor at what one is doing and ... to make bones over it, 
shows an extreme lack of grace and causes everything, whatever its worth, 
to be discounted.” 

Much of the idea of sprezzztura came from the world of art. All the 
great Renaissance artists carefully kept their works under wraps. Only the 
finished masterpiece could be shown to the public. Michelangelo forbade 
even popes to view his work in process. A Renaissance artist was always 
careful to keep his studios shut to patrons and public alike, not out of fear 
of imitation, but because to see the making of the works would mar the 
magic of their effect, and their studied atmosphere of ease and natural 
beauty. 

The Renaissance painter Vasari, also the first great art critic, ridiculed 
the work of Paolo Uccello, who was obsessed with the laws of perspective. 
The effort Uccello spent on improving the appearance of perspective was 
too obvious in his work—it made his paintings ugly and labored, over¬ 
whelmed by the effort of their effects. We have the same response when we 
watch performers who put too much effort into their act: Seeing them try¬ 
ing so hard breaks the illusion. It also makes us uncomfortable. Calm, 
graceful performers, on the other hand, set us at ease, creating the illusion 
that they are not acting but being natural and themselves, even when 
everything they are doing involves labor and practice. 

The idea of sprezzfltura is relevant to all forms of power, for power 
depends vitally on appearances and the illusions you create. Your public 
actions are like artworks: They must have visual appeal, must create antici¬ 
pation, even entertain. When you reveal the inner workings of your cre¬ 
ation, you become just one more mortal among others. What is 
understandable is not awe-inspiring—we tell ourselves we could do as well 
if we had the money and time. Avoid the temptation of showing how 
clever you are—it is far more clever to conceal the mechanisms of your 
cleverness. 

Talleyrand’s application of this concept to his daily life greatly en¬ 
hanced the aura of power that surrounded him. He never liked to work too 
hard, so he made others do the work for him—the spying, the research, the 
detailed analyses. With all this labor at his disposal, he himself never 
seemed to strain. When his spies revealed that a certain event was about to 
take place, he would talk in social conversation as if he sensed its immi¬ 
nence. The result was that people thought he was clairvoyant. His short 
pithy statements and witticisms always seemed to summarize a situation 
perfectly, but they were based on much research and thought. To those in 
government, including Napoleon himself, Talleyrand gave the impression 
of immense power—an effect entirely dependent on the apparent ease 
with which he accomplished his feats. 

There is another reason for concealing your shortcuts and tricks: 



When you let this information out, you give people ideas they can use 
against you. You lose the advantages of keeping silent. We tend to want the 
world to know what we have done—we want our vanity gratified by hav- 
mg our hard work and cleverness applauded, and we may even want sym¬ 
pathy for the hours it has taken to reach our point of artistry. Learn to 
control this propensity to blab, for its effect is often the opposite of what 
you expected. Remember: The more mystery surrounds your actions, the 
more awesome your power seems. You appear to be the only one who can 
do what you do—and the appearance of having an exclusive gift is im¬ 
mensely powerful. Finally, because you achieve your accomplishments 
with grace and ease, people believe that you could always do more if you 
tried harder. This elicits not only admiration but a touch of fear. Your pow¬ 
ers are untapped—no one can fathom their limits. 


Image: The Racehorse. From up close we would see the 
strain, the effort to control the horse, the labored, painful 
breathing. Rut from the distance where we sit and watch, it 
is all gracefulness, flying through the air. Keep others at a 
distance and they will only see the ease with which you move. 


Authority: For whatever action [nonchalance] accompanies, no 
matter how trivial it is, it not only reveals the skill of the person 
doing it but also very often causes it to be considered far greater 
than it really is. This is because it makes the onlookers believe that 
a man who performs well with so much facility must possess even 
greater skill than he does. (Baldassare Castiglione, 1478-1529) 


REVERSAL 

The secrecy with which you surround your actions must seem lighthearted 
in spirit A zeal to conceal your work creates an unpleasant, almost para¬ 
noiac impression: you are taking the game too seriously. Houdini was care¬ 
ful to make the concealment of his tricks seem a game, all part of the show. 
Never show your work until it is finished, but if you put too much effort 
into keeping it under wraps you will be like the painter Pontormo, who 
spent the last years of his life hiding his frescoes from the public eye and 
only succeeded in driving himself mad. Always keep your sense of humor 
about yourself. 

There are also times when revealing the inner workings of your pro¬ 
jects can prove worthwhile. It all depends on your audience’s taste, and on 



the times in which you operate. P. T. Bamum recognized that his public 
wanted to feel involved in his shows, and that understanding his tricks de¬ 
lighted them, partly, perhaps, because implicitly debunking people who 
kept their sources of power hidden from the masses appealed to America’s 
democratic spirit. The public also appreciated the showman’s humor and 
honesty. Bamum took this to the extreme of publicizing his own humbug- 
gery in his popular autobiography, written when his career was at its 
height 

As long as the partial disclosure of tricks and techniques is carefully 
planned, rather than the result of an uncontrollable need to blab, it is the 
ultimate in cleverness. It gives the audience the illusion of being superior 
and involved, even while much of what you do remains concealed from 
them. 



LAW 



CONTROL THE OPTIONS: 
GET OTHERS TO PLAY WITH 
THE CARDS YOU DEAL 


JUDGMENT 

The best deceptions are the ones that seem to give the 
other person a choice: Your victims feel they are in con¬ 
trol, but are actually your puppets . Give people options 
that come out in your favor whichever one they choose. 
Force them to make chokes between the lesser of two evils, 
both of whkh serve your purpose. Put them on the horns 
of a dilemma: They are gored wherever they turn . 



OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I 

From early in his reign, Ivan IV, later known as Ivan the Terrible, had to 
confront an unpleasant reality: The country desperately needed reform, 
but he lacked the power to push it through. The greatest limit to his author¬ 
ity came from the boyars, the Russian princely class that dominated the 
country and terrorized the peasantry. 

In 1553, at the age of twenty-three, Ivan fell ill. Lying in bed, nearing 
death, he asked the boyars to swear allegiance to his son as the new czar. 
Some hesitated, some even refused. Then and there Ivan saw he had no 
power over the boyars. He recovered from his illness, but he never forgot 
the lesson: The boyars were out to destroy him. And indeed in the years to 
come, many of the most powerful of them defected to Russia’s main ene¬ 
mies, Poland and Lithuania, where they plotted their return and the over¬ 
throw of the czar. Even one of Ivan’s closest friends, Prince Audrey 
Kurbski, suddenly turned against him, defecting to Lithuania in 1564, and 
becoming the strongest of Ivan’s enemies. 

When Kurbski began raising troops for an invasion, the royal dynasty 
seemed suddenly more precarious than ever. With emigre nobles foment¬ 
ing invasion from the west, Tartars bearing down from the east, and the bo¬ 
yars stirring up trouble within the country, Russia’s vast size made it a 
nightmare to defend. In whatever direction Ivan struck, he would leave 
himself vulnerable on the other side. Only if he had absolute power could 
he deal with this many-headed Hydra. And he had no such power. 

Ivan brooded until the morning of December 3, 1564, when the citi¬ 
zens of Moscow awoke to a strange sight. Hundreds of sleds filled die 
square before the Kremlin, loaded with the czar’s treasures and with provi¬ 
sions for the entire court. They watched in disbelief as the czar and his 
court boarded the sleds and left town. Without explaining why, he estab¬ 
lished himself in a village south of Moscow. For an entire month a kind of 
terror gripped the capital, for the Muscovites feared that Ivan had aban¬ 
doned them to the bloodthirsty boyars. Shops closed up and riotous mobs 
gathered daily. Finally, on January 3 of 1565, a letter arrived from the czar, 
explaining that he could no longer bear the boyars’ betrayals and had de¬ 
cided to abdicate once and for all. 

Read aloud in public, the letter had a startling effect: Merchants and 
commoners blamed the boyars for Ivan’s decision, and took to the streets, 
terrifying the nobility with their fury. Soon a group of delegates represent¬ 
ing the church, the princes, and the people made the journey to Ivan’s vil¬ 
lage, and begged the czar, in the name of the holy land of Russia, to return 
to the throne. Ivan listened but would not change his mind. After days of 
hearing their pleas, however, he offered his subjects a choice: Either they 
giant him absolute powers to govern as he pleased, with no interference 
from the boyars, or they find a new leader. 

Faced with a choice between civil war and the acceptance of despotic 
power, almost every sector of Russian society “opted” for a strong czar, 
calling for Ivan’s return to Moscow and the restoration of law and order. In 


The German Chancel¬ 
lor Bismarck, enraged 
at the constant criti¬ 
cisms from Rudolf 
Virchow (the German 
pathologist and liberal 
politician), had his 
seconds call upon the 
scientist to challenge 
him to a duel. “As the 
challenged party, / have 
the choice of weapons," 
said Virchow, “and / 
choose these," He held 
aloft two large and 
apparently identical 
sausages, “One of 
these,” he went on, “is 
infected with deadly 
germs; the other is 
perfectly sound. Let 
His Excellency decide 
which one he wishes to 
eat. and I will eat the 
other. ” A hrtost immedi¬ 
ately the message came 
back that (he chancel¬ 
lor had decided to 
cancel the duel. 

THE LITTLE, BROWN 
BOOK OF ANECDOTES, 

Clifton Fadiman, ed.. 
1985 


LAW 31 


255 




THE LIAR 

Once upon a time there 
was a king of Armenia, 
who , being of a curious 
turn o f mind and in 
need of some new 
diversion, sent his 
heralds throughout the 
land to make 
the following 
proclamation: 
“Hear this! Whatever 
man among you can 
prove himself the most 
outrageous liar in 
Armenia shall receive 
an apple made of pure 
gold from the hands of 
His Majesty the King !” 
People began to swarm 
to the palace from 
every town and hamlet 
in the country, people 
of all ranks and 
conditions, princes, 
merchants, farmers, 
priests, rich and poor, 
tall and short, fat and 
thin. There was no lack 
of liars in the land, and 
each one told his tale to 
the king ; A ruler, 
however, has heard 
practically every sort of 
lie, and none of those 
now told him 
convinced the king that 
he had listened to the 
best of them. 
The king was begin¬ 
ning to grow tired of 
his new sport and was 
thinking of calling the 
whole contest off with¬ 
out declaring a winner, 
when there appeared 
before him a poor, 
ragged man, carrying a 
large earthenware 
pitcher under his arm. 
”What can l do for 
you?’’ asked His 
Majesty. 
“Sire!” said the poor 
man, slightly bewil- 


February, with much celebration, Ivan returned to Moscow. The Russians 
could no longer complain if he behaved dictatorially—they had given him 
this power themselves. 

Interpretation 

Ivan the Terrible faced a terrible dilemma: To give in to the boyars would 
lead to certain destruction, but civil war would bring a different kind of 
ruin. Even if Ivan came out of such a war on top, the country would be dev¬ 
astated and its divisions would be stronger than ever. His weapon of choice 
in the past had been to make a bold, offensive move. Now, however, that 
kind of move would turn against him—the more boldly he confronted his 
enemies, the worse the reactions he would spark. 

The main weakness of a show of force is that it stirs up resentment and 
eventually leads to a response that eats at your authority, Ivan, immensely 
creative in the use of power, saw dearly that the only path to the kind of 
victory he wanted was a false withdrawal. He would not force the country 
over to his position, he would give it “options”: either his abdication, and 
certain anarchy, or his accession to absolute power. To back up his move, 
he made it clear that he preferred to abdicate: “Call my bluff,” he said, 
“and watch what happens.” No one called his bluff. By withdrawing for just 
a month, he showed the country a glimpse of the nightmares that would 
follow his abdication—Tartar invasions, civil war, ruin. (All of these did 
eventually come to pass after Ivan’s death, in the infamous “Time of the 
Troubles.”} 

Withdrawal and disappearance are classic ways of controlling the op¬ 
tions. You give people a sense of how things will fall apart without you, and 
you offer them a “choice”: I stay away and you suffer the consequences, or 
I return under circumstances that I dictate. In this method of controlling 
people’s options, they choose the option that gives you power because the 
alternative is just too unpleasant. You force their hand, but indirectly: They 
seem to have a choice. Whenever people feel they have a choice, they walk 
into your trap that much more easily. 


OBSERVANCE QF TH£ LAW n 

As a seventeenth-century French courtesan, Ninon de Lenclos found that 
her life had certain pleasures. Her lovers came from royalty and aristoc¬ 
racy, and they paid her well, entertained her with their wit and intellect, 
satisfied her rather demanding sensual needs, and treated her almost as an 
equal. Such a life was infinitely preferable to marriage. In 1643, however, 
Ninon’s mother died suddenly, leaving her, at the age of twenty-three, to¬ 
tally alone in the world—no family, no dowry, nothing to fall back upon. A 
kind of panic overtook her and she entered a convent, turning her back on 
her illustrious lovers. A year later she left the convent and moved to Lyons. 
When she finally reappeared in Paris, in 1648, lovers and suitors flocked to 
her door in greater numbers than ever before, for she was the wittiest and 


256 


LAW 31 



most spirited courtesan of the time and her presence had been greatly 
missed. 

Ninon’s followers quickly discovered, however, that she had changed 
her old way of doing things, and had set up a new system of options. The 
cbkes, seigneurs, and princes who wanted to pay for her services could 
continue to do so, but they were no longer in control—she would sleep 
with them when she wanted, according to her whim. All their money 
bought them was a possibility. If it was her pleasure to sleep with them only 
once a month, so be it. 

Those who did not want to be what Ninon called a payeur could join 
the large and growing group of men she called her martyrs —men who vis- 
ited her apartment principally for her friendship, her biting wit, her lute¬ 
playing, and the company of the most vibrant minds of the period, 
including Moliere, La Rochefoucauld, and Saint-Evremond. The martyrs , 
too, however, entertained a possibility; She would regularly select from 
them a favori, a man who would become her lover without having to pay, 
and to whom she would abandon herself completely for as long as she so 
desired—a week, a few months, rarely longer. A payeur could not become a 
favori, but a martyr had no guarantee of becoming one, and indeed could 
remain disappointed for an entire lifetime. The poet Charleval, for exam¬ 
ple, never enjoyed Ninon’s favors, but never stopped coming to visit—he 
did not want to do without her company. 

As word of this system reached polite French society, Ninon became 
the object of intense hostility. Her reversal of the position of the courtesan 
scandalized the queen mother and her court. Much to their horror, how¬ 
ever, it did not discourage her male suitors—indeed it only increased their 
numbers and intensified their desire. It became an honor to be a payeur, 
helping Ninon to maintain her lifestyle and her glittering salon, accompa¬ 
nying her sometimes to the theater, and sleeping with her when she chose. 
Even more distinguished were the martyrs, enjoying her company without 
paying for it and maintaining the hope, however remote, of some day be¬ 
coming her favori. That possibility spurred on many a young nobleman, as 
word spread that none among the courtesans could surpass Ninon in the 
art of love. And so the married and the single, the old and the young, en¬ 
tered her web and chose one of the two options presented to them, both of 
which amply satisfied her. 

Interpretation 

The life of the courtesan entailed the possibility of a power that was denied 
a married woman, but it also had obvious perils. The man who paid for the 
courtesan’s services in essence owned her, determining when he could pos¬ 
sess her and when, later on, he would abandon her. As she grew older, her 
options narrowed, as fewer men chose her. To avoid a life of poverty she 
had to amass her fortune while she was young. The courtesan’s legendary 
greed, then, reflected a practical necessity, yet also lessened her allure, 
since the illusion of being desired is important to men, who are often alien- 


dered- "Surely you 
remember? You owe 
me. a pot of gold, and l 
have come to 
collect it." 

“You are a perfect liar, 
sir!" exclaimed the 
king. “I (me you no 
money!” 

“A perfect liar, am /? ” 
said the poor man. 

“Then give me the 
golden apple!” 

The king, realizing that 
the man was trying to 
trick him, started to 
hedge. 

“No, no! You are not a 
liar!” 

“Then give me the pot 
of gold you owe me, 
sire, ” said the man. 

The king saw the 
dilemma. He handed 
over the golden apple. 

ARMENIAN FOLK-TALES 
AND FABLES, 

RETOLD IiY 

Charles Downing. 
1993 


257 


LAW 31 



./. P. Morgan Sr. once 
told a jeweler of his 
acquaintance that he 
was interested in 
buying a pearl scarf- 
pin. Just a few weeks 
later, the jeweler 
happened upon a 
magnificent pearl. He 
had it mounted in an 
appropriate setting and 
sent it to Morgan , 
together with a bill for 
$5,000. The following 
day the package was 
returned. Morgan’s 
accompanying note 
read: ‘7 like the pin, 
but / don’t like the 
price. If you will accept 
the enclosed check for 
$4,000, please send 
back the box with the 
seal unbroken ." The 
enraged jeweler refused 
the check and dis¬ 
missed the messenger 
in disgust. He opened 
up the box to reclaim 
the unwanted pin, only 
to find that it had been 
removed. In its place 
was a check for $5,000. 

THE LITTLE, BROWN 
BOOK OF ANECDOTES, 
Clifton Packman, i n., 
19S5 


ated if their partner is too interested in their money. As die courtesan aged, 
then, she faced a most difficult fate. 

Ninon de Lenclos had a horror of any kind of dependence. She early 
on tasted a kind of equality with her lovers, and she would not settle into a 
system that left her such distasteful options. Strangely enough, the system 
she devised in its place seemed to satisfy her suitors as much as it did her. 
The payettrs may have had to pay, but the fact that Ninon would only sleep 
with them when she wanted to gave them a thrill unavailable with every 
other courtesan: She was yielding out of her own desire. The martyrs* 
avoidance of the taint of having to pay gave them a sense of superiority; as 
members of Ninon’s fraternity of admirers, they also might some day expe¬ 
rience the ultimate pleasure of being her favori. Finally, Ninon did not 
force her suitors into either category. They could “choose” which side they 
preferred—a freedom that left them a vestige of masculine pride. 

Such is the power of giving people a choice, or rather the illusion of 
one, for they are playing with cards you have dealt them. Where the alter¬ 
natives set up by Ivan the Terrible involved a certain risk—one option 
would have led to his losing his power—Ninon created a situation in which 
every option redounded to her favor, From the payeurs she received the 
money she needed to run her salon. And from the martyrs she gained the 
ultimate in power: She could surround herself with a bevy of admirers, a 
harem from which to choose her lovers. 

The system, though, depended on one critical factor: the possibility, 
however remote, that a martyr could become a favori. The illusion that 
riches, glory, or sensual satisfaction may someday fall into your victim’s lap 
is an irresistible carrot to include in your list of choices. That hope, how¬ 
ever slim, will make men accept the most ridiculous situations, because it 
leaves them the all-important option of a dream. The illusion of choice, 
married to the possibility of future good fortune, will lure the most stub¬ 
born sucker into your glittering web. 


KEYS TO POWER 

Words like “freedom,” “options,” and “choice” evoke a power of possibility 
far beyond the reality of the benefits they entail. When examined closely, 
the choices we have—in the marketplace, in elections, in our jobs—tend to 
have noticeable limitations: They are often a matter of a choice simply be¬ 
tween A and B, with the rest of the alphabet out of the picture. Yet as long 
as the faintest mirage of choice flickers on, we rarely focus on the missing 
options. We “choose” to believe that the game is fair, and that we have our 
freedom. We prefer not to think too much about the depth of our liberty to 
choose. 

This unwillingness to probe the smallness of our choices stems from 
the fact that too much freedom creates a kind of anxiety. The phrase '‘un¬ 
limited options” sounds infinitely promising, but unlimited options would 
actually paralyze us and cloud our ability to choose. Our limited range of 
choices comforts us. 


258 


LAW 31 



This supplies the clever and cunning with enormous opportunities for 
deception. For people who are choosing between alternatives find it hard 
to believe they are being manipulated or deceived; they cannot see that 
you are allowing them a small amount of free will in exchange for a much 
more powerful imposition of your own will. Setting up a narrow range of 
choices, then, should always be a part of your deceptions. There is a say¬ 
ing: If you can get the bird to walk into the cage on its own, it will sing that 
much more prettily. 

The following are among the most common forms of “controlling the 
options”: 

Color the Choices. This was a favored technique of Henry Kissinger. As 
President Richard Nixon’s secretary of state, Kissinger considered himself 
better informed than his boss, and believed that in most situations he could 
make the best decision on his own. But if he tried to determine policy, he 
would offend or perhaps enrage a notoriously insecure man. So Kissinger 
would propose three or four choices of action for each situation, and would 
present them in such a way that the one he preferred always seemed the 
best solution compared to the others. Time after time, Nixon fell for the 
bait, never suspecting that he was moving where Kissinger pushed him. 
This is an excellent device to use on the insecure master. 

Force the Resister, One of the main problems faced by Dr. Milton H. Er¬ 
ickson, a pioneer of hypnosis therapy in the 1950s, was the relapse. His pa¬ 
tients might seem to be recovering rapidly, but their apparent susceptibility 
to the therapy masked a deep resistance: They would soon relapse into old 
habits, blame the doctor, and stop coming to see him. To avoid this, Erick¬ 
son began ordering some patients to have a relapse, to make themselves feel 
as bad as when they first came in—to go back to square one. Faced with 
this option, the patients would usually “choose” to avoid the relapse— 
which, of course, was what Erickson really wanted. 

This is a good technique to use on children and other willful people 
who enjoy doing the opposite of what you ask them to*. Push them to 
“choose” what you want them to do by appearing to advocate the opposite. 

Alter the Playing Field. In the 1860s, John D, Rockefeller set out to cre¬ 
ate an oil monopoly. If he tried to buy up the smaller oil companies they 
would figure out what he was doing and fight back. Instead, he began se¬ 
cretly buying up the railway companies that transported the oil. When he 
then attempted to take over a particular company, and met with resistance, 
he reminded them of their dependence on the rails. Refusing them ship¬ 
ping, or simply raising their fees, could ruin their business. Rockefeller al¬ 
tered the playing field so that the only options the small oil producers had 
were the ones he gave them. 

In this tactic your opponents know their hand is being forced, but it 
doesn’t matter. The technique is effective against those who resist at all 
costs. 



The Shrinking Options. The iate-nineteenth-century art dealer Am- 
broise Vollard perfected this technique. 

Customers would come to Vollard’s shop to see some Cezannes. He 
would show three paintings, neglect to mention a price, and pretend to 
doze off. The visitors would have to leave without deciding. They would 
usually come back the next day to see the paintings again, but this time 
Vollard would pull out less interesting works, pretending he thought they 
were the same ones. The baffled customers would look at the new offer¬ 
ings, leave to think them over, and return yet again. Once again the same 
thing would happen: Vollard would show paintings of lesser quality still Fi¬ 
nally the buyers would realize they had better grab what he was showing 
them, because tomorrow they would have to settle for something worse, 
perhaps at even higher prices. 

A variation on this technique is to raise the price every time the buyer 
hesitates and another day goes by. This is an excellent negotiating ploy to 
use on the chronically indecisive, who will fall for the idea that they are get¬ 
ting a better deal today than if they wait till tomorrow. 

The Weak Man on the Precipice. The weak are the easiest to maneuver 
by controlling their options. Cardinal de Retz, the great seventeenth-cen¬ 
tury provocateur, served as an unofficial assistant to the Duke of Orleans, 
who was notoriously indecisive. It was a constant struggle to convince the 
duke to take action—he would hem and haw, weigh the options, and wait 
till the last moment, giving everyone around him an ulcer. But Retz discov¬ 
ered a way to handle him: He would describe all sorts of dangers, exagger¬ 
ating them as much as possible, until the duke saw a yawning abyss in 
every direction except one; the one Retz was pushing him to take. 

This tactic is similar to “Color the Choices,” but with the weak you 
have to be more aggressive. Work on their emotions—use fear and terror 
to propel them into action. Try reason and they will always find a way to 
procrastinate. 

Brothers in Crime. This is a classic con-artist technique: You attract your 
victims to some criminal scheme, creating a bond of blood and guilt be¬ 
tween you. They participate in your deception, commit a crime (or think 
they do—see the story of Sam Geezil in Law 3), and are easily manipu¬ 
lated. Serge Stavisky, the great French con artist of the 1920s, so entangled 
the government in his scams and swindles that the state did not dare to 
prosecute him, and “chose” to leave him alone. It is often wise to implicate 
in your deceptions the very person who can do you the most harm if you 
fail Their involvement can be subtle—even a hint of their involvement 
will narrow their options and buy their silence. 

The Horns of a Dilemma. This idea was demonstrated by General 
William Sherman’s infamous march through Georgia during the American 
Civil War. Although the Confederates knew what direction Sherman was 



heading in, they never knew if he would attack from the left or the right, for 
he divided his army into two wings—and if the rebels retreated from one 
wing they found themselves facing the other. This is a classic trial lawyer’s 
technique: The lawyer leads the witnesses to decide between two possible 
explanations of an event, both of which poke a hole in their story. They 
have to answer the lawyer’s questions, but whatever they say they hurt 
themselves. The key to this move is to strike quickly: Deny die victim the 
time to think of an escape. As they wriggle between the horns of the 
dilemma, they dig their own grave. 

Understand: In your struggles with your rivals, it will often be necessary 
for you to hurt them. And if you are clearly the agent of their punishment, 
expect a counterattack—expect revenge. If, however, they seem to them¬ 
selves to be the agents of their own misfortune, they will submit quietly. 
When Ivan left Moscow for his rural village, the citizens asking him to re* 
turn agreed to his demand for absolute power. Over the years to come, 
they resented him less for the terror he unleashed on the country, because, 
after all, they had granted him his power themselves. This is why it is al¬ 
ways good to allow your victims their choice of poison, and to cloak your 
involvement in providing it to them as far as possible. 


Image: The 
the Bull, 
backs you 
ner with its 
a single hom, 
might be 
cape, but a 
that trap you 
hold. Run 
left—either 
move into 
ends and 


Horns of 
The bull 
into the cor- 
horns—not 
which you 
able to es- 
pair of horns 
within their 
right or run 
way you 
their piercing 
are gored. 


Authority: For the wounds and every other evil that men inflict upon them¬ 
selves spontaneously, and of their own choice, are in the long run less 
painful than those inflicted by others. (Niccolo Machiavelli, 1469-1527) 



REVERSAL 

Controlling the options has one main purpose: to disguise yourself as the 
agent of power and punishment. The tactic works best, then, for those 
whose power is fragile, and who cannot operate too openly without incur¬ 
ring suspicion, resentment, and anger. Even as a general rule, however, it is 
rarely wise to be seen as exerting power directly and forcefully, no matter 
how secure or strong you are. It is usually more elegant and more effective 
to give people the illusion of choice. 

On the other hand, by limiting other people’s options you sometimes 
limit your own. There are situations in which it is to your advantage to 
allow your rivals a large degree of freedom: As you watch them operate, 
you give yourself rich opportunities to spy, gather information, and plan 
your deceptions. The nineteenth-century banker James Rothschild liked 
this method: He felt that if he tried to control his opponents’ movements, 
he lost the chance to observe their strategy and plan a more effective 
course. The more freedom he allowed them in the short term, the more 
forcefully he could act against them in the long run. 



LAW 



PLAY TO PEOPLE'S 
FANTASIES 


JUDGMENT 

The truth is often avoided because it is ugly and un¬ 
pleasant Never appeal to truth and reality unless you 
are prepared for the anger that comes from disen¬ 
chantment. Life is so harsh and distressing that people 
who can manufacture romance or conjure up fantasy are 
like oases in the desert: Everyone flocks to them. There is 
great power in tapping into the fantasies of the masses. 



TMK l-TNKRAL OF 
TltK UONKKS 

The lion having 
suddenly lost his 
queen, every one 
hastened to show alle¬ 
giance to (he monarch, 
by offering consola¬ 
tion. These compli¬ 
ments, alas, served hut 
to increase the 
widower's affliction. 
Due notice was given 
throughout the king¬ 
dom that the funeral 
would be performed at 
a certain time and 
place; the lion > officers 
were ordered to be in 
attendance, to regulate 
the ceremony, and 
place the company 
according to their 

respective rank. 
One may well judge no 
one absented himself 
The monarch gave w>/iy 
to his grief, and the 
whole cave, lions hav¬ 
ing no other temples; 
resounded with his 
cries. After his example, 
all the courtiers roared 
in their different tones. 
A court is the sort of 
place where everyone is 
either sorrowful , gay, 
or indifferent to every¬ 
thing, just as the reign¬ 
ing prince may think 
fit; or if any one is not 
actually, he at least tries 
to appear so: each 
endeavors to mimic the 
master. It is truly said 
that one mind animates 
a thousand bodies, 
clearly showing that 
human beings 
are mere machines. 
Hut let us return to our 
subject. The stag alone 
shed no tears. How 
could he, forsooth? The 
death of (he queen 
avenged him; she had 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

The city-state of Venice was prosperous for so long that its citizens felt their 
small republic had destiny on its side. In the Middle Ages and High Re¬ 
naissance, its virtual monopoly on trade to the east made it the wealthiest 
city in Europe. Under a beneficent republican government, Venetians en¬ 
joyed liberties that few other Italians had ever known. Yet in the sixteenth 
century their fortunes suddenly changed. The opening of the New World 
transferred power to the Adantic side of Europe—to the Spanish and Por¬ 
tuguese, and later the Dutch and English. Venice could not compete eco¬ 
nomically and its empire gradually dwindled. The final blow was the 
devastating loss of a prized Mediterranean possession, the island of 
Cyprus, captured from Venice by the Turks in 1570. 

Now noble families went broke in Venice, and banks began to fold. A 
kind of gloom and depression settled over the citizens. They had known a 
glittering past—had either lived through it or heard stories about it from 
their elders. The closeness of the glory years was humiliating. The Vene¬ 
tians half believed that the goddess Fortune was only playing a joke on 
them, and that the old days would soon return. For the time being, though, 
what could they do? 

In 1589 rumors began to swirl around Venice of the arrival not far 
away of a mysterious man called “II Bragadino,” a master of alchemy, a 
man who had won incredible wealth through his ability, it was said, to mul¬ 
tiply gold through the use of a secret substance. The rumor spread quickly 
because a few years earlier, a Venetian nobleman passing through Poland 
had heard a learned man prophesy that Venice would recover her past 
glory and power if she could find a man who understood the alchemic art 
of manufacturing gold. And so, as word reached Venice of the gold this 
Bragadino possessed—he clinked gold coins continuously in his hands, 
and golden objects filled his palace—some began to dream: Through him, 
their city would prosper again. 

Members of Venice’s most important noble families accordingly went 
together to Brescia, where Bragadino lived. They toured his palace and 
watched in awe as he demonstrated his gold-making abilities, taking a 
pinch of seemingly worthless minerals and transforming it into several 
ounces of gold dust. The Venetian senate prepared to debate the idea of ex¬ 
tending an official invitation to Bragadino to stay in Venice at the city’s ex¬ 
pense, when word suddenly reached them that they were competing with 
the Duke of Mantua for his services. They heard of a magnificent party in 
Bragadino’s palace for the duke, featuring garments with golden buttons, 
gold watches, gold plates, and on and on. Worried they might lose Bra¬ 
gadino to Mantua, the senate voted almost unanimously to invite him to 
Venice, promising him the mountain of money he would need to continue 
living in his luxurious style—but only if he came right away. 

Late that year the mysterious Bragadino arrived in Venice, With his 
piercing dark eyes under thick brows, and the two enormous black mastiffs 
that accompanied him everywhere, he was forbidding and impressive. He 
took up residence in a sumptuous palace on the island of the Giudecca, 


264 LAW 32 



with the republic funding his banquets, his expensive clothes, and all his 
other whims. A kind of alchemy fever spread through Venice. On street 
comers, hawkers would sell coal, distilling apparatus, bellows, how-to 
books on the subject. Everyone began to practice alchemy—everyone ex¬ 
cept Bragadino. 

The alchemist seemed to be in no hurry to begin manufacturing the 
gold that would save Venice from ruin. Strangely enough this only in¬ 
creased his popularity and following; people thronged from all over Eu¬ 
rope, even Asia, to meet this remarkable man. Months went by, with gifts 
pouring in to Bragadino from all sides. Still he gave no sign of the miracle 
that the Venetians confidently expected him to produce. Eventually the cit¬ 
izens began to grow impatient, wondering if he would wait forever. At first 
fee senators warned them not to hurry him—he was a capricious devil, 
who needed to be cajoled. Finally, though, the nobility began to wonder 
too, and the senate came under pressure to show a return on the city’s bal¬ 
looning investment. 

Bragadino had only scorn for the doubters, but he responded to them. 
He had, he said, already deposited in the city’s mint the mysterious sub¬ 
stance with which he multiplied gold. He could use this substance up all at 
once, and produce double the gold, but the more slowly the process took 
place, the more it would yield. If left alone for seven yeans, sealed in a cas¬ 
ket, the substance would multiply the gold in the mint thirty times over. 
Most of the senators agreed to wait to reap the gold mine Bragadino 
promised. Others, however, were angry: seven more years of this man liv¬ 
ing royally at the public trough! And many of the common citizens of 
Venice echoed these sentiments. Finally the alchemist’s enemies demanded 
he produce a proof of his skills: a substantial amount of gold, and soon. 

Lofty, apparently devoted to his art, Bragadino responded that Venice, 
in its impatience, had betrayed him, and would therefore lose his services. 
He left town, going first to nearby Padua, then, in 1590, to Munich, at the 
invitation of the Duke of Bavaria, who, like the entire city of \fenice, had 
known great wealth but had fallen into bankruptcy through his own profli¬ 
gacy, and hoped to regain his fortune through the famous alchemist’s ser¬ 
vices. And so Bragadino resumed the comfortable arrangement he had 
known in Venice, and the same pattern repeated itself. 

Interpretation 

The young Cypriot Mamugna had lived in Venice for several years before 
reincarnating himself as the alchemist Bragadino. He saw how gloom had 
settled on the city, how everyone was hoping for a redemption from some 
indefinite source. While other charlatans mastered everyday cons based on 
sleight of hand, Mamugna mastered human nature. With Venice as his tar¬ 
get from the start, he traveled abroad, made some money through his 
alchemy scams, and then returned to Italy, setting up shop in Brescia. 
There he created a reputation that he knew would spread to Venice. From 
a distance, in fact, his aura of power would be all the more impressive. 

At first Mamugna did not use vulgar demonstrations to convince peo 


formerly strangled his 
wife and son. A courtier 
thought fit to inform the 
bereaved monarch, and 
even affirmed that he 
had seen the stag laugh. 
The rage of a king, says 
Solomon, is terrible, 
and especially that of 
a lion-king. “Pitiful 
forester!" he exclaimed, 
"darettt thou laugh 
when all around are 
dissolved in tears? We 
will not soil our royal 
claws with thy profane 
blood! Do thou, brave 
wolf avenge our queen , 
by immolating this 
traitor to her august 
manes .” 

Hereupon the stag 
replied: "'Sire, the time 
for weeping is passed; 
grief is here superflu¬ 
ous, Your revered 
spouse appeared to me 
but now, reposing on a 
bed of roses; l instantly 
recognized her. 'Friend,' 
said she to me, 'have 
done with this funereal 
pomp, cease these 
useless tears. / have 
tasted a thousand 
delights in the Elvsian 
fields, conversing with 
those who are saints like 
myself. Let the king’s 
despair remain for 
some time unchecked, it 
gratifies me.' ” Scarcely 
had he spoken, when 
every one shouted: "A 
miracle! a miraclef” 

The stag, instead of 
being punished, re¬ 
ceived a handsome gift. 
Do but entertain a king 
with dreams, flatter 
him, and tell him a few 
pleasant fantastic lies: 
whatever his indigna¬ 
tion against you may 
be, he will swallow the 
bait, and make you his 
dearest friend. 

EAttUi-S, 

Jean de La Fontaine. 
1621-1695 


LAW 32 26.5 



If you want to tell lies 
that will he believed , 
don’t tell the. truth 
that won’t. 

Emperor Toiuic,awa 
Ieyasu of Japan, 

SI-V E N TEE NTH CEN TORY 


pie of his alchemic skill. His sumptuous palace, his opulent garments, the 
clink of gold in his hands, all these provided a superior argument to any¬ 
thing rational. And these established the cycle that kept him going: His ob¬ 
vious wealth confirmed his reputation as an alchemist, so that patrons like 
the Duke of Mantua gave him money, which allowed him to live in wealth, 
which reinforced his reputation as an alchemist, and so on. Only once this 
reputation was established, and dukes and senators were fighting over him, 
did he resort to the trifling necessity of a demonstration. By then, however, 
people were easy to deceive: They wanted to believe. The Venetian sena¬ 
tors who watched him multiply gold wanted to believe so badly that they 
failed to notice the glass pipe up his sleeve, from which he slipped gold 
dust into his pinches of minerals. Brilliant and capricious, he was the al¬ 
chemist of their fantasies—and once he had created an aura like this, no 
one noticed his simple deceptions. 

Such is the power of the fantasies that take root in us, especially in 
times of scarcity and decline. People rarely believe that their problems 
arise from their own misdeeds and stupidity. Someone or something out 
there is to blame—the other, the world, the gods—and so salvation comes 
from the outside as well. Had Bragadino arrived in Venice armed with a 
detailed analysis of the reasons behind the city’s economic decline, and of 
the hard-nosed steps that it could take to turn things around, he would 
have been scorned. The reality was too ugly and the solution too painful— 
mostly the kind of hard work that the citizens’ ancestors had mustered to 
create an empire. Fantasy, on the other hand-—in this case the romance of 
alchemy—was easy to understand and infinitely more palatable. 

To gain power, you must be a source of pleasure for those around 
you—and pleasure comes from playing to people’s fantasies. Never 
promise a gradual improvement through hard work; rather, promise the 
moon, the great and sudden transformation, the pot of gold. 


No man need despair of gaining converts to the most extravagant 
hypothesis who has art enough to represent it in favorable colors. 
David Hume. 1711-1776 


KEYS TO POWER 

Fantasy can never operate alone. It requires the backdrop of the humdrum 
and the mundane. It is the oppressiveness of reality that allows fantasy to 
take root and bloom. In sixteenth-century Venice, the reality was one of de¬ 
cline and loss of prestige. The corresponding fantasy described a sudden 
recovery of past glories through the miracle of alchemy. While the reality 
only got worse, the Venetians inhabited a happy dream world in which 
their city restored its fabulous wealth and power overnight, turning dust 
into gold. 

The person who can spin a fantasy out of an oppressive reality has ac¬ 
cess to untold power. As you search for the fantasy that will take hold of the 


266 \ LAW 32 



masses, then, keep your eye on the banal truths that weigh heavily on us 
all. Never be distracted by people’s glamorous portraits of themselves and 
their lives; search and dig for what really imprisons them. Once you find 
that, you have the magical key that will put great power in your hands. 

Although times and people change, let us examine a few of the oppres¬ 
sive realities that endure, and the opportunities for power they provide: 

The Reality: Change is slow and gradual. It requires hard work, a bit of luck, a fair 
amount of self-sacrifice, and a lot of patience. 

The Fantasy: A sudden transformation tvill bring a total change in one’s fortunes, 
bypassing work, luck, self-sacrifice , and time in one fantastic stroke. 

This is of course the fantasy par excellence of the charlatans who 
prowl among us to this day, and was the key to Bragadino’s success. 
Promise a great and total change—from poor to rich, sickness to health, 
misery to ecstasy—and you will have followers. 

How did the great sixteenth-century German quack Leonhard 
Thumeisser become the court physician for the Elector of Brandenburg 
without ever studying medicine? Instead of offering amputations, leeches, 
and foul-tasting purgatives (the medicaments of the time), Thurneisser of¬ 
fered sweet-tasting elixirs and promised instant recovery. Fashionable 
courtiers especially wanted his solution of “drinkable gold,” which cost a 
fortune. If some inexplicable illness assailed you, Thumeisser would con¬ 
sult a horoscope and prescribe a talisman. Who could resist such a 
fantasy—health and well-being without sacrifice and pain! 

The Reality: The- social realm has hard-set codes and boundaries . We understand 
these limits and know that we have to move within the same familiar circles , day in 
and day out 

The Fantasy: We can enter a totally new world with different codes and the promise 
of adventure. 

In the early 1700s, all London was abuzz with talk of a mysterious 
stranger, a young man named George Fsalmanazar. He had arrived from 
what was to most Englishmen a fantastical land: the island of Formosa 
(now Taiwan), off the coast of China. Oxford University engaged 
Fsalmanazar to teach the island’s language; a few years later he translated 
the Bible into Formosan, then wrote a book—an immediate best seller—on 
Formosa’s history and geography. English royalty wined and dined the 
young man, and everywhere he went he entertained his hosts with won¬ 
drous stories of his homeland, and its bizarre customs. 

After Psalmanazar died, however, his will revealed that he was in fact 
merely a Frenchman with a rich imagination. Everything he had said about 
Formosa—its alphabet, its language, its literature, its entire culture—he had 
invented. He had built on the English public’s ignorance of the place to 
concoct an elaborate story that fulfilled their desire for the exotic and 



strange. British culture’s rigid control of people’s dangerous dreams gave 
him the perfect opportunity to exploit their fantasy. 

The fantasy of the exotic, of course, can also skirt the sexual. It must 
not come too close, though, for the physical hinders the power of fantasy; it 
can be seen, grasped, and then tired of—the fate of most courtesans. The 
bodily charms of the mistress only whet the master’s appetite for more and 
different pleasures, a new beauty to adore. To bring power, fantasy must re¬ 
main to some degree unrealized, literally unreal. The dancer Mata Hari, 
for instance, who rose to public prominence in Paris before World War I, 
had quite ordinary looks. Her power came from the fantasy she created of 
being strange 'and exotic, unknowable and indecipherable. The taboo she 
worked with was less sex itself than the breaking of social codes. 

Another form of the fantasy of the exotic is simply the hope for relief 
from boredom. Con artists love to play on the oppressiveness of the work¬ 
ing world, its lack of adventure. Their cons might involve, say, the recov¬ 
ery of lost Spanish treasure, with the possible participation of an alluring 
Mexican senorita and a connection to the president of a South American 
country'—anything offering release from the humdrum. 

The Reality: Society is fragmented and full of conflict . 

The Fantasy: People can come together in a mystical union of souls. 

In the 1920s the con man Oscar Hartzell made a quick fortune out of 
the age-old Sir Francis Drake swindle—basically promising any sucker who 
happened to be sumamed “Drake” a substantial share of the long-lost 
“Drake treasure,” to which Hartzell had access. Thousands across the Mid¬ 
west fell for the scam, which Hartzell cleverly turned into a crusade against 
the government and everyone else who was trying to keep the Drake for¬ 
tune out of the rightful hands of its heirs. There developed a mystical union 
of the oppressed Drakes, with emotional rallies and meetings. Promise such 
a union and you can gain much power, but it is a dangerous power that can 
easily turn against you. This is a fantasy for demagogues to play on. 

The Reality: Death. The dead cannot be brought back, the past cannot be changed. 
The Fantasy: A sudden reversal of this intolerable fact. 

This con has many variations, but requires great skill and subtlety. 

The beauty and importance of the art of Vermeer have long been rec¬ 
ognized, but his paintings are small in number, and are extremely rare. In 
the 1930s, though, Vermeers began to appear on the art market Experts 
were called on to verify them, and pronounced them real. Possession of 
these new Vermeers would crown a collector’s career. It was like the resur¬ 
rection of Lazarus: In a strange way, Vermeer had been brought back to 
life. The past had been changed. 

Only later did it come out that the new Vermeers were the work of a 
middle-aged Dutch forger named Han van Meegeren. And he had chosen 



Vermeer for his scam because he understood fantasy: The paintings would 
seem real precisely because the public, and the experts as well, so desper¬ 
ately wanted to believe they were. 

Remember: The key to fantasy is distance. The distant has allure and 
promise, seems simple and problem free. What you are offering, then, 
should be ungraspable. Never let it become oppressively familiar; it is the 
mirage in the distance, withdrawing as the sucker approaches. Never be 
too direct in describing the fantasy—keep it vague. As a forger of fantasies, 
let your victim come close enough to see and be tempted, but keep him far 
away enough that he stays dreaming and desiring. 


Image: The 
Moon. Unattainable, 
always changing shape, 
disappearing and reappear¬ 
ing. We look at it, imagine, 
wonder, and pine—never fa¬ 
miliar, continuous provoker 
of dreams. Do not offer 
the obvious. Promise 
the moon. 


Authority: A lie is an allurement, a fabrication, that can be embell¬ 
ished into a fantasy. It can be clothed in the raiments of a mystic 
conception. Truth is cold, sober fact, not so comfortable to absorb. 
A lie is more palatable. The most detested person in the world is 
the one who always tells the truth, who never romances. . . . 
I found it far more interesting and profitable to romance than to 
tell the truth. (Joseph Weil, a.k.a. “The Yellow Kid,” 1875-1976} 


LAW 32 


269 



REVERSAL 

If there is power in tapping into the fantasies of the masses, there is also 
danger. Fantasy usually contains an element of play—the public half real¬ 
izes it is being duped, but it keeps the dream alive anyway, relishing the en¬ 
tertainment and the temporary diversion from the everyday that you are 
providing. So keep it light—never come too close to the place where you 
are actually expected to produce results. That place may prove extremely 
hazardous. 

After Bragadino established himself in Munich, he found that the 
sober-minded Bavarians had far less faith in alchemy than the tempera¬ 
mental Venetians. Only the duke really believed in it, for he needed it des¬ 
perately to rescue him from the hopeless mess he was in. As Bragadino 
played his familiar waiting game, accepting gifts and expecting patience, 
the public grew angry. Money was being spent and was yielding no results. 
In 1592 the Bavarians demanded justice, and eventually Bragadino found 
himself swinging from the gallows. As before, he had promised and had 
not delivered, but this time he had misjudged the forbearance of his hosts, 
and his inability to fulfill their fantasy proved fatal. 

One last thing: Never make the mistake of imagining that fantasy is al¬ 
ways fantastical. It certainly contrasts with reality, but reality itself is some¬ 
times so theatrical and stylized that fantasy becomes a desire for simple 
things. The image Abraham Lincoln created of himself, for example, as a 
homespun country lawyer with a beard, made him the common man’s 
president. 

P. T. Bamum created a successful act with Tom Thumb, a dwarf who 
dressed up as famous leaders of the past, such as Napoleon, and lam¬ 
pooned them wickedly. The show delighted everyone, right up to Queen 
Victoria, by appealing to the fantasy of the time: Enough of the vain¬ 
glorious rulers of history, the common man knows best Tom Thumb re¬ 
versed the familiar pattern of fantasy in which the strange and unknown 
becomes the ideal. But the act still obeyed the Law, for underlying it 
was the fantasy that the simple man is without problems, and is happier 
than the powerful and the rich. 

Both Lincoln and Tom Thumb played the commoner but carefully 
maintained their distance. Should you play with such a fantasy, you too 
must carefully cultivate distance and not allow your “common*’ persona to 
become too familiar or it will not project as fantasy. 



LAW 


33 

DISCOVER EACH 
MAN’S THUMBSCREW 

JUDGMENT 

Everyone has a weakness, a gap in the castle wall That 
weakness is usually an insecurity , an uncontrollable 
emotion or need; it can also be a small secret pleasure . 
Either way, once found, it is a thumbscrew you can turn 
to your advantage. 



Ti ik lion, tuk 

CHAMOIS. AM) I'm: K>X 

A lion was chasing a 
chamois along a valley. 
He had all hut caught 
it, atul with longing 
eyes was anticipating a 
certain and a satisfying 
repast. It seemed as if it 
were utterly impossible 
for the victim to escape; 
for a deep ravine 
appeared to bar the 
way for both the hunter 
and the. hunted. But the 
nimble chamois, gath¬ 
ering together all its 
strength, shot like an 
arrow from a bow 
across the chasm, and 
stood still on the rocky 
cliff on ihe other side. 
Our lion pulled up 
short. Bui at that 
moment a friend of his 
happened (o be near at 
hand. That friend was 
the fox. 

“WhatJ" said he, “with 
your strength and 
agility, is it possible 
that you will yield to a 
feeble chamois? You 
have only to will, and 
you will be able to 
work wonders. Though 
ihe abyss he deep, yet. if 
you are only in earnest, 
t am certain you will 
clear it. Surely you can 
confide in my disinter¬ 
ested friendship. I 
would not expose your 
life to danger if l were 
not so well aware of 
your strength and 
dexterity 

The lion’s blood waxed 
hot, and began to boil 
in his veins. He flung 
himself with all his 
might into space. But 
he could not clear the 
chasm ; so down he 
tumbled headlong, and 
was killed by the fall. 

272 : law 33 


FINDING THE THUMBSCREW: A Strategic Plan of Action 
We all have resistances. We live with a perpetual armor around ourselves 
to defend against change and the intrusive actions of friends and rivals. We 
would like nothing more than to be left to do things our own way. Con¬ 
stantly butting up against these resistances will cost you a lot of energy. 
One of the most important things to realize about people, though, is that 
they all have a weakness, some part of their psychological armor that will 
not resist, that will bend to your will if you find it and push on it. Some peo¬ 
ple wear their weaknesses openly, others disguise them. Those who dis¬ 
guise them are often the ones most effectively undone through that one 
chink in their armor. 

In planning your assault, keep these principles in mind: 

Pay Attention to Gestures and Unconscious Signals. As Sigmund 
Freud remarked, “No mortal can keep a secret. If his lips are silent, he chat¬ 
ters with his fingertips; betrayal oozes out of him at every pore.” This is a 
critical concept in the search for a person’s weakness—it is revealed by 
seemingly unimportant gestures and passing words. 

The key is not only what you look for but where and how you look. 
Everyday conversation supplies the richest mine of weaknesses, so brain 
yourself to listen. Start by always seeming interested—the appearance of a 
sympathetic ear will spur anyone to talk. A clever trick, often used by the 
nineteenth-century French statesman Talleyrand, is to appear to open up to 
the other person, to share a secret with them. It can be completely made 
up, or it can be real but of no great importance to you—the important 
thing is that it should seem to come from the heart. This will usually elicit a 
response that is not only as frank as yours but more genuine—a response 
that reveals a weakness. 

If you suspect that someone has a particular soft spot, probe for it indi¬ 
rectly. If, for instance, you sense that a man has a need to be loved, openly 
flatter him. If he laps up your compliments, no matter how obvious, you 
are on the right track. Train your eye for details—how someone tips a 
waiter, what delights a person, the hidden messages in clothes. Find peo¬ 
ple’s idols, the things they worship and will do anything to get—-perhaps 
you can be the supplier of their fantasies. Remember: Since we all try to 
hide our weaknesses, there is little to be learned from our conscious behav¬ 
ior. What oozes out in the little things outside our conscious control is what 
you want to know. 

Find the Helpless Child. Most weaknesses begin in childhood, before 
the self builds up compensatory defenses. Perhaps the child was pampered 
or indulged in a particular area, or perhaps a certain emotional need went 
unfulfilled; as he or she grows older, the indulgence or the deficiency may 
be buried but never disappears. Knowing about a childhood need gives 
you a powerful key to a person’s weakness. 

One sign of this weakness is that when you touch on it the person will 
often act like a child. Be on the lookout, then, for any behavior that should 



have been outgrown. If your victims or rivals went without something im¬ 
portant, such as parental support, when they were children, supply it, or its 
facsimile. If they reveal a secret taste, a hidden indulgence, indulge it In ei¬ 
ther case they will be unable to resist you. 

Look for Contrasts. An overt trait often conceals its opposite. People 
who thump their chests are often big cowards; a prudish exterior may hide 
a lascivious soul; the uptight are often screaming for adventure; the shy are 
dying for attention. By probing beyond appearances, you will often find 
people’s weaknesses in the opposite of the qualities they reveal to you. 

Find the Weak Link. Sometimes in your search for weaknesses it is not 
what but who that matters. In today’s versions of the court, there is often 
someone behind the scenes who has a great deal of power, a tremendous 
influence over the person superficially on top. These behind-the-scenes 
powerbrokers are the group’s weak link: Win their favor and you indirectly 
influence the king. Alternatively, even in a group of people acting with the 
appearance of one will—as when a group under attack closes ranks to resist 
an outsider—there is always a weak link in the chain. Find the one person 
who will bend under pressure. 

Fill the Void. The two main emotional voids to fill are insecurity and un¬ 
happiness. The insecure are suckers for any kind of social validation; as for 
the chronically unhappy, look for the roots of their unhappiness. The inse¬ 
cure and the unhappy are the people least able to disguise their weak¬ 
nesses. The ability to fill their emotional voids is a great source of power, 
md an indefinitely prolongable one. 

Feed on Uncontrollable Emotions. The uncontrollable emotion can be 
a paranoid fear—a fear disproportionate to the situation—or any base mo¬ 
tive such as lust, greed, vanity, or hatred. People in the grip of these emo¬ 
tions often cannot control themselves, and you can do the controlling for 
them. 


OBSERVANCES OF THE LAW 
Observance 1 

In 1615 the thirty-year-old bishop of Lu$on, later known as Cardinal Riche¬ 
lieu, gave a speech before representatives of the three estates of France— 
clergy, nobility, and commoners. Richelieu had been chosen to serve as 
the mouthpiece for the clergy*—an immense responsibility for a man still 
young and not particularly well known. On all of the important issues of 
the day, the speech followed the Church line. But near the end of it Riche¬ 
lieu did something that had nothing to do with the Church and everything 
to do with his career. He turned to the throne of the fifteen-year-old King 
Louis XIII, and to the Queen Mother Marie de’ Medicis, who sat beside 


Then what did his dear 
friend do? He 
cautiously made his 
way down to the 
bottom of the ravine,. 
and there , out in the 
open space and the free 
air i seeing that the lion 
wanted neither flattery 
nor obedience now, he 
set to work to pay the 
last sad rites to his 
dead friend, and in a 
month picked his bones 
dean. 

.FABLES, 

Ivan Kriloff. 
1768-3844 


IRVINC LAZAR 

[Hollywood super- 
agentj Irving Paul 
Lazar was once 
anxious to sell [studio 
mogul} Jack L. Warner 
a play. '7 had a long 
meeting with him 
today," Lazar 
explained [to screen¬ 
writer Garson Kanin], 

“but f didn't mention 
it, / didn’t even bring 
it up.” 

" Why not? ” / asked. 
“Because I'm going to 
wait until the weekend 
after next, when J go to 
Palm Springs.” 

'7 don’t understand 
“ You don't? / go to 
Palm Springs every 
weekend, but Warner 
isn't going this week¬ 
end. He’s got a preview 
or something. So he’s 
not coming down till 
the next weekend, so 
that’s when I’m going 
to bring it up.” 

“hying, I’m more and 


LAW 33 


273 




more confused. ” 
“Look ." said Irving 
impatiently, "l know 
what I'm doing. / know 
how to sell Warner. 
This is a type of mate¬ 
rial that he ’v uneasy 
with, so / have to hit 
him with it hard and 
suddenly to 
get an okay." 
“But why Palm 
Springs?" 
"Because in Palm 
Springs, every day he 
goes to the baths at The 
Spa. And that’s where 
I'm going to be when 
he's there. Now there’s 
a thing about Jack: He's 
eighty and he's very 
vain, and he doesn ’/ 
like people to see him 
naked. So when / walk 
up to him naked at The 
Spa —/ mean he's 
naked — well. I’m 
naked too, hut / don V 
care who sees me. He 
does. And I walk up to 
him naked, and / start 
to talk to him about 
this thing, he’ll be very 
embarrassed. A nd 
he'll, want to get away 
from me, and the easi¬ 
est way is to say' Yes, ' 
because he knows if he 
says ‘No,’ then I'm 
going to stick with him, 
and stay right on it, and 
not give up, So to get 
rid of me, he’ll proba¬ 
bly say , ‘Yes.'" 
Two weeks Utter, l read 
of the acquisition of 
this particular property 
by Warner Brothers. I 
phoned Lazar and 
asked how it had been 
accomplished. "How 
do you think?” he 
asked. "In the buff 
that's how .. fust the 
way / told you it was 
going to work.” 

HOLLYWOOD, 
Garson Kanin, 
1974 


Louis, ais the regent ruling France until her son reached Ills majority. Every¬ 
one expected Richelieu to say the usual kind words to the young king. In¬ 
stead, however, he looked directly at and only at the queen mother. Indeed 
his speech ended in long and fulsome praise of her, praise so glowing that it 
actually offended some in the Church. But the smile on the queen’s face as 
she lapped up Richelieu’s compliments was unforgettable. 

A year later the queen mother appointed Richelieu secretary of state 
for foreign affairs, an incredible coup for the young bishop. He had now 
entered the inner circle of power, and he studied the workings of the court 
as if it were the machinery of a watch. An Italian, Concinu Concini, was 
the queen mother’s favorite, or rather her lover, a role that made him per¬ 
haps the most powerful man in France. Concini was vain and foppish, and 
Richelieu played him perfectly—attending to him as if he were the king. 
Within months Richelieu had become one of Concini’s favorites. But 
something happened in 1617 that turned everything upside down: the 
young king, who up until then had shown every sign of being an idiot, had 
Concini murdered and his most important associates imprisoned. In so 
doing Louis took command of the country with one blow, sweeping the 
queen mother aside. 

Had Richelieu played it wrong? He had been close to both Concini 
and Marie de Medicis, whose advisers and ministers were now all out of 
favor, some even arrested. The queen mother herself was shut up in the 
Louvre, a virtual prisoner. Richelieu wasted no time. If everyone was de¬ 
serting Marie de Medicis, he would stand by her. He knew Louis could not 
get rid of her, for the king was still very young, and had in any case always 
been inordinately attached to her. As Marie’s only remaining powerful 
friend, Richelieu filled the valuable function of liaison between the king 
and his mother. In return he received her protection, and was able to sur¬ 
vive the palace coup, even to thrive. Over the next few years the queen 
mother grew still more dependent on him, and in 1622 she repaid him for 
his loyalty: Through the intercession of her allies in Rome, Richelieu was 
elevated to the powerful rank of cardinal. 

By 1623 King Louis was in trouble. He had no one he could trust to 
advise him, and although he was now a young man instead of a boy, he re¬ 
mained childish in spirit, and affairs of state came hard to him. Now that he 
had taken the throne, Marie was no longer the regent and theoretically had 
no power, but she still had her son’s ear, and she kept telling him that 
Richelieu was Iris only possible savior. At first Louis would have none of 
it—he hated the cardinal with a passion, only tolerating him out of love for 
Marie. In the end, however, isolated in the court and crippled by his own 
indecisiveness, he yielded to his mother and made Richelieu first his chief 
councilor and later prime minister. 

Now Richelieu no longer needed Marie de Medicis. He stopped visit¬ 
ing and courting her, stopped listening to her opinions, even argued with 
her and opposed her wishes. Instead he concentrated on the king, making 
himself indispensable to his new master. All the previous premiers, under¬ 
standing the king’s childishness, had tried to keep him out of trouble; the 


274 


LAW 33 




shrewd Richelieu played him differently, deliberately pushing him into 
one ambitious project after another, such as a crusade against the 
Huguenots and finally an extended war with Spain. The immensity of 
these projects only made the king more dependent on his powerful pre¬ 
mier, the only man able to keep order in the realm. And so, for the next 
eighteen years, Richelieu, exploiting the king’s weaknesses, governed and 
molded France according to his own vision, unifying the country and mak¬ 
ing it a strong European power for centuries to come. 

Interpretation 

Richelieu saw everything as a military campaign, and no strategic move 
was more important to him than discovering his enemy’s weaknesses and 
applying pressure to them. As early as his speech in 1615, he was looking 
for the weak link in the chain of power, and he saw that it was the queen 
mother. Not that Marie was obviously weak-—she governed both France 
and her son; but Richelieu saw that she was really an insecure woman who 
needed constant masculine attention. He showered her with affection and 
respect, even toadying up to her favorite, Concini. He knew the day would 
come when the king would take over, but he also recognized that Louis 
loved his mother dearly and would always remain a child in relation to her. 
The way to control Louis, then, was not by gaining his favor, which could 
change overnight, but by gaining sway over his mother, for whom his af¬ 
fection would never change. 

Once Richelieu had the position he desired—prime minister—he dis¬ 
carded the queen mother, moving on to the next weak link in the chain: 
the king’s own character. There was a part of him that would always be a 
helpless child in need of higher authority. It was on the foundation of the 
king’s weakness that Richelieu established his own power and fame. 

Remember: When entering the court, fold the weak link. The person 
in control is often not the king or queen; it is someone behind the scenes— 
the favorite, the husband or wife, even the court fool. This person may 
have more weaknesses than the king himself, because his power depends 
on all kinds of capricious factors outside his control. 

Finally, when dealing with helpless children who cannot make deci¬ 
sions, play on their weakness and push them into bold ventures. They will 
have to depend on you even more, for you will become the adult figure 
whom they rely on to get them out of scrapes and to safety. 

Observance II 

In December of 1925, guests at the swankiest hotel in Palm Beach, Florida, 
watched with interest as a mysterious man arrived in a Rolls-Royce driven 
by a Japanese chauffeur. Over the next few days they studied this hand¬ 
some man, who walked with an elegant cane, received telegrams at all 
hours, and only engaged in the briefest of conversations. He was a count, 
they heard. Count Victor Lustig, and he came from one of the wealthiest 
families in Europe—but this was all they could find out. 

Imagine their amazement, then, when Lustig one day walked up to 
one of the least distinguished guests in the hotel, a Mr. Herman Loller, 


TiiK i.PT'ri.K rinses 
OOI’NT 

As time went on l came 
to took for the little 
weaknesses .... Its the 
little things that count. 
On one occasion, I 
worked on the presi¬ 
dent of a large hank in 
Omaha. The [phony} 
deal involved the 
purchase of (he street 
railway system of 
Omaha, including a 
bridge across the 
Mississippi River. My 
principals were suppose 
ally German and / had 
to negotiate with 
Berlin. While a waiting 
word from them 1 
introduced my fake 
mining-stock proposi¬ 
tion. Since this man 
rich, 1 decided to 
play for high stakes .... 
Meanwhile ; / played 
golf with the hanker, 
visited his home, and 
went to the theater with 
him and his wife. 
Though he showed 
some interest in my 
stock deal, he still 
wasn V convinced. / had 
built it up to the. point 
that an investment of 
$1,250,000 was 
required. Of this / was 
to put up $900,000, the 
banker $350,000. But 
still he hesitated. 

One evening when 1 
was at his home for 
dinner I wore some 
perfume — Coty's "April 
Violets. ” It was not then 
considered effeminate 
for a man to use a dash 
of perfume. The 
banker's wife thought it 
very lovely. “ Where did 
you get it?” 

“It is a rare blend, n 
l told her ; “especially 
made for me by a 


LAW 33 


275 





French perfumer. Do 
you (ike it? " 
"7 love it, ’’she replied. 
The following day I 
went through my 
effects and found two 
empty bottles. Both had 
come from France, but 
were empty. / went to a 
downtown department 
store and purchased 
ten ounces of Co ty's 
"April Violets." / 
poured this into the 
two French bottles, 
carefully sealed them, 
wrapped them in 
tissue paper: 
Thai evening f dropped 
by the banker’s home 
and presented the two 
bottles to his wife . 
“They were, especially 
put up for me in 
CologneI told her. 

The next day the 
banker called at my 
hotel. His wife was 
enraptured by the 
perfume. She consid¬ 
ered it the most 
wonderful, the most 
exotic fragrance she 
had ever used. / did not 
tell the banker he could 
get all he wanted right 
in Omaha. 
“She said, ” the banker 
added, “that / was 
fortunate to be associ¬ 
ated with a man like 
you," From then on his 
attitude was changed, 
for he had complete 
faith in his wife's judg¬ 
ment. .. . He parted 
with $350,000. This, 
incidentally was my 
biggest / con] score. 

“YELI-OW KIO” WEfl.. 

1875-1976 


head of an engineering company, and entered into conversation with him. 
Loller had made his fortune only recently, and forging social connections 
was very important to him. He felt honored and somewhat intimidated by 
this sophisticated man, who spoke perfect English with a hint of a foreign 
accent Over the days to come, the two became friends. 

Loller of course did most of the talking, and one night he confessed 
that his business was doing poorly, with more troubles ahead In return, 
Lustig confided in his new friend that he too had serious money 
problems—Communists had seized his family estate and all its assets. He 
was too old to learn a trade and go to work. Luckily he had found an an¬ 
swer—“a money-making machine.” “You counterfeit?” Loller whispered in 
half-shock. No, Lustig replied, explaining that through a secret chemical 
process, his machine could duplicate any paper currency with complete ac¬ 
curacy. Put in a dollar bill and six hours later you had two, both perfect. He 
proceeded to explain how the machine had been smuggled out of Europe, 
how the Germans had developed it to undermine the British, how it had 
supported the count for several years, and on and on. When Loller insisted 
on a demonstration, the two men went to Lustig’s room, where the count 
produced a magnificent mahogany box fitted with slots, cranks, and dials. 
Loller watched as Lustig inserted a dollar bill in the box. Sure enough, 
early the following morning Lustig pulled out two bills, still wet from the 
chemicals. 

Lustig gave the notes to Loller, who immediately took the bills to a 
local bank—which accepted them as genuine. Now the businessman fever¬ 
ishly begged Lustig to sell him a machine. The count explained that there 
was only one in existence, so Loller made him a high offer: $25,000, then a 
considerable amount (more than $400,000 in today’s terms). Even so, 
Lustig seemed reluctant: He did not feel right about making his friend pay 
so much. Yet finally he agreed to the sale. After all, he said, “I suppose it 
matters little what you pay me. You are, after all, going to recover the 
amount within a few days by duplicating your own bills.” Making Loller 
swear never to reveal the machine’s existence to other people, Lustig ac¬ 
cepted the money. Later the same day he checked out of the hotel. A year 
later, after many futile attempts at duplicating bills, Loller finally went to 
the police with the story of how Count Lustig had conned him with a pair 
of dollar bills, some chemicals, and a worthless mahogany box. 
Interpretation 

Count Lustig had an eagle eye for other people’s weaknesses. He saw them 
in the smallest gesture. Loller, for instance, overtipped waiters, seemed 
nervous in conversation with the concierge, talked loudly about his busi¬ 
ness. His weakness, Lustig knew, was his need for social validation and for 
the respect that he thought his wealth had earned him. He was also chroni¬ 
cally insecure. Lustig had come to the hotel to hunt for prey. In Loller he 
homed in on the perfect sucker—a man hungering for someone to fill his 
psychic voids. 

In offering Loller his friendship, then, Lustig knew' he was offering him 
the immediate respect of the other guests. As a count, Lustig was also offer- 


276 


LAW 33 



ing the newly rich businessman access to the glittering world of old wealth. 
And for the coup de grace, he apparently owned a machine that would res- 
cue Loller from his worries. It would even put him on a par with Lustig 
himself, who had also used the machine to maintain his status. No wonder 
Loller took the bait. 

Remember: When searching for suckers, always look for the dissatis¬ 
fied, the unhappy, the insecure. Such people are riddled with weaknesses 
and have needs that you can fill. Their neediness is the groove in which 
you place your thumbnail and turn them at will. 

Observance III 

In the year 1559, the French king Henri II died in a jousting exhibition. His 
son assumed the throne, becoming Francis II, but in the background stood 
Henri's wife and queen, Catherine de' Medicis, a woman who had long 
ago proven her skill in affairs of state. When Francis died the next year, 
Catherine took control of the country as regent to her next son in line of 
succession, the future Charles IX, a mere ten years old at the time. 

The main threats to the queen's power were Antoine de Bourbon, king 
of Navarre, and his brother, Louis, the powerful prince of Conde, both of 
whom could claim the right to serve as regent instead of Catherine, who, 
after all, was Italian—a foreigner. Catherine quickly appointed Antoine 
lieutenant general of the kingdom, a title that seemed to satisfy his ambi¬ 
tion. It also meant that he had to remain in court, where Catherine could 
keep an eye on him. Her next move proved smarter still: Antoine had a 
notorious weakness for young women, so she assigned one of her most at¬ 
tractive maids of honor, Louise de Rouet, to seduce him. Now Antoine’s 
intimate, Louise reported all of his actions to Catherine. The move worked 
so brilliantly that Catherine assigned another of her maids to Prince 
Conde, and thus was formed her escadron volant —“flying squadron”—of 
young girls whom she used to keep the unsuspecting males in the court 
under her control. 

In 1572 Catherine married off her daughter. Marguerite de Valois, to 
Henri, the son of Antoine and the new king of Navarre. To put a family that 
had always struggled against her so close to power was a dangerous move, 
so to make sure of Henri’s loyalty she unleashed on him the loveliest mem¬ 
ber of her “flying squadron,” Charlotte de Beaune Semblamjay, baroness 
of Sauves. Catherine did this even though Henri was married to her daugh¬ 
ter. Within weeks, Marguerite de Valois wrote in her memoirs, “Mme. de 
Sauves so completely ensnared my husband that we no longer slept to¬ 
gether, nor even conversed.” 

The baroness was an excellent spy and helped to keep Henri under 
Catherine’s thumb. When the queen’s youngest son, the Duke of Alencon, 
grew so dose to Henri that she feared the two might plot against her, she 
assigned the baroness to him as well. This most infamous member of the 
flying squadron quickly seduced Alencon, and soon the two young men 
fought over her and their friendship quickly ended, along with any danger 
of a conspiracy. 


And while l am on the 
subject, there is another 
fact that deserves 
mention, ft is this. A 
man shows his charac¬ 
ter just in the way in 
which he deals with 
trifles—for then he is 
off his guard. This will 
often a fjord a good 
opportunity of observ¬ 
ing the boundless 
egoism of a man’s 
nature, and his total 
lack of consideration 
for others; and if these 
defects show them¬ 
selves in small things, 
or merely in his general 
demeanour, you will 
find that they also 
underlie his action in 
matters of importance, 
although he may 
disguise the fact. This is 
an opportunity which 
should not be missed. 

If in the little affairs of 
every day—the trifles of 
life...—a man is 
inconsiderate and seeks 
only what is advanta¬ 
geous or convenient to 
himself to the preju¬ 
dice of others’ rights; if 
he appropriates lo 
himself that which 
belongs to all alike, you 
may be sure (here is no 
justice in his heart , and 
that he would be a 
scoundrel on a whole¬ 
sale scale, only that law 
and compulsion bind 
his hands. 

Arthur 

SrHO.PHNHA.UPR. 

17881860 


LAW 33 




rill: HATTI.K AT 
PI1ARSAIJA 

When the two armies 
IJulius Caesars and 
Pompey’sJ were come 
into Phursalia , and 
both encamped there, 
Pampey's thoughts ran 
the same way as they 
had done before, 
against fighting .... But 
those who were about 
him were greatly confi¬ 
dent of success... as if 
they had already 
conquered .... The 
cavalry especially were 
obstinate for fighting, 
being splendidly armed 
and bravely mounted, 
and valuing themselves 
upon the fine horses 
they kept , and upon 
their own handsome 
persons; as also upon 
the advantage of their 
numbers , for they were 
five thousand against 
one thousand of 
Caesar’s. Nor were the 
numbers of the infantry 
less disproportionate, 
there being forty-five 
thousand of Pampey's 
against twenty-two 
thousand of (he enemy. 
(The next day / whilst 
the infantry was thus 
sharply engaged in the 
main buttle, on the 
flunk Pampey's horse 
rode up confidently, 
and opened f his 
cavalry’s} ranks very 
wide, that they might 
surround the right wing 
of Caesar. But before 
they engaged, Caesar’s 
cohorts rushed out and 
attacked them , and did 
not dart their javelins 
at a distance, nor strike 
at the thighs and legs, 
as they usually did in 
close battle, but aimed 
at their faces. For thus 

278 LAW 33 


Interpretation 

Catherine had seen very early on the sway that a mistress has over a man 
of power: Her own husband, Henri II, had kept one of the most infamous 
mistresses of them all, Diane de Poitiers. What Catherine learned from the 
experience was that a man like her husband wanted to feel he could win a 
woman over without having to rely on his status, which he had inherited 
rather than earned. And such a need contained a huge blind spot: As long 
as the woman began the affair by acting as if she had been conquered, the 
man would fail to notice that as time passed the mistress had come to hold 
power over him, as Diane de Poitiers did over Henri. It was Catherine’s 
strategy to turn this weakness to her advantage, using it as a way to conquer 
and control men. All she had to do was unleash the loveliest women in the 
court, her “flying squadron,” on men whom she knew shared her hus¬ 
band’s vulnerability. 

Remember: Always look for passions and obsessions that cannot be 
controlled. The stronger the passion, the more vulnerable the person. This 
may seem surprising, for passionate people look strong. In fact, however, 
they are simply filling the stage with their theatricality, distracting people 
from how weak and helpless they really are. A man’s need to conquer 
women actually reveals a tremendous helplessness that has made suckers 
out of them for thousands of years. Look at the part of a person that is most 
visible—their greed, their lust, their intense fear. These are the emotions 
they cannot conceal, and over which they have the least control. And what 
people cannot control, you can control for them. 

Observance IV 

Arabella Huntington, wife of the great late-nineteenth-century railroad 
magnate Collis P. Huntington, came from humble origins and always 
struggled for social recognition among her wealthy peers. When she gave a 
party in her San Francisco mansion, few of the social elite would show up; 
most of them took her for a gold digger, not their kind. Because of her hus¬ 
band’s fabulous wealth, art dealers courted her, but with such condescen¬ 
sion they obviously saw her as an upstart. Only one man of consequence 
treated her differently; the dealer Joseph Duveen. 

For the first few years of Duveen’s relationship with Arabella, he made 
no effort to sell expensive art to her. Instead he accompanied her to fine 
stores, chatted endlessly about queens and princesses he knew, on and on. 
At last, she thought, a man who treated her as an equal, even a superior, in 
high society. Meanwhile, if Duveen did not try to sell art to her, he did sub¬ 
tly educate her in his aesthetic ideas—namely, that the best art was the 
most expensive art. And after Arabella had soaked up his way of seeing 
things, Duveen would act as if she always had exquisite taste, even though 
before she met him her aesthetics had been abysmal. 

When Collis Huntington died, in 1900, Arabella came into a fortune. 
She suddenly started to buy expensive paintings, by Rembrandt and 
Velazquez, for example—and only from Duveen. Years later Duveen sold 
her Gainsborough’s Blue Boy for die highest price ever paid for a work of 




art at the time, an astounding purchase for a family that previously had 
shown little interest in collecting. 

Interpretation 

Joseph Duveen instantly understood Arabella Huntington and what made 
her tick: She wanted to feel important, at home in society. Intensely inse¬ 
cure about her lower-class background, she needed confirmation of her 
new social status. Duveen waited. Instead of rushing into trying to per¬ 
suade her to collect art, he subtly went to work on her weaknesses. He 
made her feel that she deserved his attention not because she was the wife 
of one of the wealthiest men in the world but because of her own special 
character—and this completely melted her. Duveen never condescended 
to Arabella; rather than lecturing to her, he instilled his ideas in her indi¬ 
rectly. The result was one of his best and most devoted clients, and also the 
sale of The Blm Boy . 

People’s need for validation and recognition, their need to feel impor¬ 
tant, is the best kind of weakness to exploit First, it is almost universal; sec¬ 
ond, exploiting it is so very easy. All you have to do is find ways to make 
people feel better about their taste, their social standing, their intelligence. 
Once the fish are hooked, you can reel them in again and again, for 
years—you are filling a positive role, giving them what they cannot get on 
their own. They may never suspect that you are turning them like a thumb¬ 
screw, and if they do they may not care, because you are making them feel 
better about themselves, and that is worth any price. 

Observance V 

In 1862 King William of Prussia named Otto von Bismarck premier and 
minister for foreign affairs. Bismarck was known for his boldness, his ambi¬ 
tion—and his interest in strengthening the military. Since William was sur¬ 
rounded by liberals in his government and cabinet, politicians who already 
wanted to limit his powers, it was quite dangerous for him to put Bismarck 
in this sensitive position. His wife, Queen Augusta, had tried to dissuade 
him, but although she usually got her way with him, this time William 
stuck to his guns. 

Only a week after becoming prime minister, Bismarck made an im¬ 
promptu speech to a few dozen ministers to convince them of the need to 
enlarge the army. He ended by saying, “The great questions of the time 
will be decided, not by speeches and resolutions of majorities, but by iron 
and blood.” His speech was immediately disseminated throughout Ger¬ 
many. The queen screamed at her husband that Bismarck was a barbaric 
militarist who was out to usurp control of Prussia, and that William had to 
fire him. The liberals in the government agreed with her. The outcry was 
so vehement that William began to be afraid he would end up on a scaf¬ 
fold, like Louis XVI of France, if he kept Bismarck on as prime minister. 

Bismarck knew he had to get to the king before it was too late. He also 
knew he had blundered, and should have tempered his fiery words. Yet as 
he contemplated his strategy, he decided not to apologize but to do the 
exact opposite. Bismarck knew the king well. 


Caesar had instructed 
them, in hopes that 
young gentlemen, who 
had not known much 
of battles and wounds, 
but came wearing their 
hair long, in the flower 
of their age and height 
of their beauty, would 
be more apprehensive 
of such blows, and not 
care for hazarding both 
a danger at present and 
a blemish for the 
future, 

And so it proved, for 
they were so far from 
bearing the stroke of 
the javelins, that they 
could not stand the 
sight of them, bat 
turned about, and 
covered their faces to 
secure them. Once in 
disorder, presently they 
turned about to fly; and 
so most shamefully 
ruined all. For those 
who had beat them 
back at once 
outflanked the infantry, 
and falling on their 
rear, cut them to pieces. 
Pompey, who 
commanded the other 
wing of the army , when 
he saw his cavalry thus 
broken and flying, was 
no longer himself, nor 
did he now remember 
that, he was Pompey the 
Great, but, like one 
whom some god had 
deprived of his senses, 
retired to his tent with¬ 
out speaking a word , 
and there sat to expect 
the event, till the whole 
army »wu routed. 

THE ure OP JULIUS 
CAESAR. 

PunARCH. 
c. A.n. 46-120 


LAW 33 i 279 



When the two men met, William, predictably, had been worked into a 
tizzy by the queen. He reiterated his fear of being guillotined. But Bismarck 
only replied, “Yes, then we shall be dead! We must die sooner or later, and 
could there be a more respectable way of dying? I should die fighting for 
the cause of my king and master. Your Majesty would die sealing with your 
own blood your royal rights granted by God’s grace. Whether upon the 
scaffold or upon the battlefield makes no difference to the glorious staking 
of body and life on behalf of rights granted by God’s grace!” On he went, 
appealing to William’s sense of honor and the majesty of his position as 
head of the army. How could the king allow people to push him around? 
Wasn’t the honor of Germany more important than quibbling over words? 
Not only did the prime minister convince the king to stand up to both his 
wife and his parliament, he persuaded him to build up the army—Bis¬ 
marck’s goal all along. 

Interpretation 

Bismarck knew the king felt bullied by those around him. He knew that 
William had a military background and a deep sense of honor, and that he 
felt ashamed at his cravenness before his wife and his government. William 
secretly yearned to be a great and mighty king, but he dared not express 
this ambition because he was afraid of ending up like Louis XVI. Where a 
show of courage often conceals a man’s timidity, William’s timidity con¬ 
cealed his need to show courage and thump his chest. 

Bismarck sensed the longing for glory beneath William’s pacifist front, 
so he played to the king’s insecurity about his manhood, finally pushing 
him into three wars and the creation of a German empire. Timidity is a po¬ 
tent weakness to exploit. Timid souls often yearn to be their opposite—to 
be Napoleons. Yet they lack the inner strength. You, in essence, can be¬ 
come their Napoleon, pushing them into bold actions that serve your 
needs while also making them dependent on you. Remember: Look to the 
opposites and never take appearances at face value. 

Image: The 
Th umbscrew. 

Your enemy 
has secrets that 
he guards, thinks 
thoughts he will 
not reveal. But 
they come out in 
ways he cannot 
help. It is there some¬ 
where, a groove of 
weakness on his head, 
at his heart, over his 
belly. Once you find the 
groove, put your thumb in 
it and turn him at will. 



Authority: Find out each man’s thumbscrew. Tis the art of setting their 
wills in action. It needs more skill than resolution. You must know 
where to get at anyone. Every volition has a special motive which varies 
according to taste. All men are idolaters, some of fame, others of self- 
interest, most of pleasure. Skill consists in knowing these idols in order 
to bring them into play. Knowing any man’s mainspring of motive 
you have as it were the key to his will, (BaJtasar Gracian, 1601-1658) 


REVERSAL 

Playing on people’s weakness has one significant danger: You may stir up 
an action you cannot control. 

In your games of power you always look several steps ahead and plan 
accordingly. And you exploit the fact that other people are more emotional 
and incapable of such foresight. But when you play on their vulnerabilities, 
the areas over which they have least control, you can unleash emotions 
that will upset your plans. Push timid people into bold action and they may 
go too far; answer their need for attention or recognition and they may 
need more than you want to give them. The helpless, childish element you 
are playing on can turn against you. 

The more emotional the weakness, the greater the potential danger. 
Know the limits to this game, then, and never get carried away by your 
control over your victims. You are after power, not the thrill of control. 



LAW 



BE ROYAL IN YOUR OWN 
FASHION: ACT LIKE A 
KING TO BE TREATED 
LIKE ONE 


JUDGMENT 

The way you carry yourself will often determine how you 
are treated: In the long run, appearing vulgar or com¬ 
mon wiU make people disrespect you, For a king respects 
himself and inspires the same sentiment in others . By 
acting regally and confident of your powers, you make 
yourself seem destined to wear a crown 



TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

In July of 1830, a revolution broke out in Paris that forced the king, 
Charles X, to abdicate, A commission of the highest authorities in the land 
gathered to choose a successor, and the man they picked was Louis* 
Philippe, the Duke of Orleans. 

From the beginning it was clear that Louis-Philippe would be a differ¬ 
ent kind of king, and not just because he came from a different branch of 
the royal family, or because he had not inherited the crown but had been 
given it, by a commission, putting his legitimacy in question. Rather it was 
that he disliked ceremony and the trappings of royalty; he had more 
friends among the bankers than among the nobility; and his style was not 
to create a new kind of royal rule, as Napoleon had done, but to downplay 
his status, the better to mix with the businessmen and middle-class folk 
who had called him to lead. Thus the symbols that came to be associated 
with Louis-Philippe were neither the scepter nor the crown, but the gray 
hat and umbrella with which he would proudly walk the streets of Paris, as 
if he were a bourgeois out for a stroll. When Louis-Philippe invited James 
Rothschild, the most important banker in France, to his palace, he treated 
him as an equal. And unlike any king before him, not only did he talk busi¬ 
ness with Monsieur Rothschild but that was literally all he talked, for he 
loved money and had amassed a huge fortune. 

As the reign of the "‘bourgeois king” plodded on, people came to de¬ 
spise him. The aristocracy could not endure the sight of an unkingly king, 
and within a few years they turned on him. Meanwhile the growing class of 
the poor, including the radicals who had chased out Charles X, found no 
satisfaction in a ruler who neither acted as a king nor governed as a man of 
the people. The bankers to whom Louis-Philippe was the most beholden 
soon realized that it was they who controlled the country, not he, and they 
treated him with growing contempt. One day, at the start of a train trip or¬ 
ganized for the royal family, James Rothschild actually berated him—and 
in public—for being late. Once the king had made news by treating the 
banker as an equal; now the banker treated the king as an inferior. 

Eventually the workers’ insurrections that had brought down Louis- 
Philippe’s predecessor began to reemerge, and the king put them down 
with force. But what was he defending so brutally? Not the institution of the 
monarchy, which he disdained, nor a democratic republic, which his rule 
prevented. What he was really defending, it seemed, was his own fortune, 
and the fortunes of the bankers—not a way to inspire loyalty among the 
citizenry. 

In early 1848, Frenchmen of all classes began to demonstrate for elec¬ 
toral reforms that would make the country truly democratic. By February 
die demonstrations had turned violent. To assuage the populace, Louis- 
Philippe fired his prime minister and appointed a liberal as a replacement. 
But this created the opposite of the desired effect: The people sensed they 
could push the king around. The demonstrations turned into a full-fledged 
revolution, with gunfire and barricades in the streets. 


Never lose your 
self-respect, nor be too 
familiar with yourself 
when you are alone. 

Let your integrity itself 
be your own standard 
of rectitude, and be 
more indebted to the 
severity of your own 
judgment of yourself 
than to all external 
precepts. Desist from 
unseemly conduct, 
rather out of respect 
for your own virtue 
than for the strictures 
of external authority. 
Come to hold yourself 
in awe. and you will 
have no need of 
Seneca’s imaginary 
tutor. 

Bauasar Gracian. 
1601.1658 


LAW 34 =; 283 



On the night of February 23, a crowd of Parisians surrounded the 
palace. With a suddenness that caught everyone by surprise, Louis- 
Philippe abdicated that very evening and fled to England. He left no suc¬ 
cessor, nor even the suggestion of one—his whole government folded up 
and dissolved like a traveling circus leaving town. 

Interpretation 

Louis-Philippe consciously dissolved the aura that naturally pertains to 
kings and leaders. Scoffing at the symbolism of grandeur, he believed a 
new world was dawning, where rulers should act and be like ordinary citi¬ 
zens. He was right: A new world, without kings and queens, was certainly 
on its way. He was profoundly wrong, however, in predicting a change in 
the dynamics of power. 

The bourgeois king’s hat and umbrella amused the French at first, but 
soon grew irritating. People knew that Louis-Philippe was not really like 
them at all—that the hat and umbrella were essentially a kind of trick to en¬ 
courage them in the fantasy that the country had suddenly grown more 
equal. Actually, though, the divisions of wealth had never been greater. 
The French expected their ruler to be a bit of a showman, to have some 
presence. Even a radical like Robespierre, who had briefly come to power 
during the French Revolution fifty years earlier, had understood this, and 
certainly Napoleon, who had turned the revolutionary republic into an im¬ 
perial regime, had known it in his bones. Indeed as soon as Louis-Philippe 
fled the stage, the French revealed their true desire: They elected 
Napoleon’s grand-nephew president He was a virtual unknown, but they 
hoped he would re-create the great general’s powerful aura, erasing the 
awkward memory of the “bourgeois king.” 

Powerful people may be tempted to affect a common-man aura, trying 
to create the illusion that they and their subjects or underlings are basically 
the same. But the people whom this false gesture is intended to impress will 
quickly see through it. They understand that they are not being given more 
power—that it only appears as if they shared in the powerful person’s fate. 
The only kind of common touch that works is the kind affected by Franklin 
Roosevelt, a style that said the president shared values and goals with the 
common people even while he remained a patrician at heart. He never 
pretended to erase his distance from the crowd. 

Leaders who try to dissolve that distance through a false chumminess 
gradually lose the ability to inspire loyalty, fear, or love. Instead they elicit 
contempt. like Louis Philippe, they axe too uninspiring even to be worth 
the guillotine—the best they can do is simply vanish in the night, as if they 
were never there. 

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

When Christopher Columbus was trying to find funding for his legendary 
voyages, many around him believed he came from the Italian aristocracy. 
This view was passed into history through a biography written after the ex¬ 
plorer’s death by his son, which describes him as a descendant of a Count 


284 


LAW 34 



Colombo of the Castle of Cuccaro in Montferrat. Colombo in turn was said 
to be descended from the legendary Roman general Colonius, and two of 
his first cousins were supposedly direct descendants of an emperor of Com 
stantmople. An illustrious background indeed. But it was nothing more 
than illustrious fantasy, for Columbus was actually the son of Domenico 
Colombo, a humble weaver who had opened a wine shop when Christo¬ 
pher was a young man, and who then made his living by selling cheese. 

Columbus himself had created the myth of his noble background, be¬ 
cause from early on he felt that destiny had singled him out for great 
things, and that he had a kind of royalty in his blood. Accordingly he acted 
as if he were indeed descended from noble stock. After an uneventful ca¬ 
reer as a merchant on a commercial vessel, Columbus, originally from 
Genoa, settled in Lisbon. Using the fabricated story of his noble back¬ 
ground, he married into an established Lisbon family that had excellent 
connections with Portuguese royalty. 

Through his in-laws, Columbus finagled a meeting with the king of 
Portugal, Joao II, whom he petitioned to finance a westward voyage aimed 
at discovering a shorter route to Asia. In return for announcing that any 
discoveries he achieved would be made in the king’s name, Columbus 
►wanted a series of rights: the title Grand Admiral of the Oceanic Sea; the 
office of viceroy over any lands he found; and 10 percent of the future 
commerce with such lands. All of these rights were to be hereditary and for 
all time. Columbus made these demands even though he had previously 
been a mere merchant, he knew almost nothing about navigation, he could 
not work a quadrant, and he had never led a group of men. In short he had 
absolutely no qualifications for the journey he proposed. Furthermore, his 
petition included no details as to how he would accomplish his plans, just 
vague promises. 

When Columbus finished his pitch, Joao II smiled: He politely de¬ 
clined the offer, but left the door open for the future. Here Columbus must 
have noticed something he would never forget: Even as the king turned 
down the sailor’s demands, he treated them as legitimate. He neither 
laughed at Columbus nor questioned his background and credentials. In 
fact the king was impressed by the boldness of Columbus’s requests, and 
clearly felt comfortable in the company of a man who acted so confidently. 
The meeting must have convinced Columbus that his instincts were cor¬ 
rect: By asking for the moon, he had instantly raised his own status, for the 
king assumed that unless a man who set such a high price on himself were 
mad, which Columbus did not appear to be, he must somehow be worth it. 

A few years later Columbus moved to Spain. Using his Portuguese 
connections, he moved in elevated circles at the Spanish court, receiving 
subsidies from illustrious financiers and sharing tables with dukes and 
princes. To all these men he repeated his request for financing for a voyage 
to the west—and also for the rights he had demanded from Joao II. Some, 
such as the powerful duke of Medina, wanted to help, but could not, since 
they lacked the power to grant him the titles and rights he wanted. But 
Columbus would not back down. He soon realized that only one person 


at 

SIC YON 

In (fie next generation 
the family became 
much more famous 
than before through the 
distinction con ferred 
upon it by Clei.sthen.es 
the muster of Skyon. 
Cleisthenes ... had a 
daughter ; A gamut, 
whom he wished to 
marry to the best man 
in all Greece, So during 
the Olympic games, in 
which he had himself 
won the chariot race , he 
had a public announce¬ 
ment made, to the effect 
that any Greek who 
thought himself good 
enough to become 
Cleisthenes' son-in-law 
should present himself 
in S icy on within sixty- 
days—or sooner i f he 
wished-—becuuse he 
intended , within the 
year following the 
sixtieth day, to betroth 
his daughter to her 
future husband 
Cleisthenes had had a 
race-track and a 
wrestling-ring specially 
made for his purpose, 
and presently the suit¬ 
ors began to arrive — 
every man of Greek 
nationality who had 
something to be proud 
of either in his country 
or in himself ,,, 
Cleisthenes began by 
asking each {of the 
numerous suitorsf in 
turn to name his coun¬ 
try and parentage; then 
he kepi them in his 
house for a year, to get 
to know them well . 
entering into conversa¬ 
tion with them some¬ 
times singly , sometimes 
all together, and testing 
each of (hem for his 

LAW 34 285 



manly qualities and 
temper, education and 
manners .... But the 
most important test of 
all was their behaviour 
at the dinner-table. All 
(his went on through¬ 
out their stay in Sky on, 
and all the time he 
entertained them hand¬ 
somely. 
For one reason or 
another it h t «s the two 
Athenians who 
impressed Cfeisthenes 
most favourably, and 
of the two Tisander's 
son Htppodeides came 
to be preferred.... 
At last the day came 
which had been fixed 
for the betrothal, and 
Cleis the ties had to 
declare his choice. lie 
marked the day by the 
sacrifice o f a hundred 
oxen, and then gave a 
great banquet, to which 
not only the suitors bur 
everyone of note in 
Sicyon was invited. 
When dinner was over, 
the suitors began to 
compete with each 
other in music and in 
talking in company. 
In both these accom¬ 
plishments it was 
Hippodeutes who 
proved by far the 
doughtiest champion, 
until at last, as more 
and more wine was 
drunk, he asked the 
flute-player to play him 
a tune and began to 
dance to it. Now it may 
well be that he danced 
to his own satisfaction; 
Cfeisthenes, however, 
who was watching 
the performance, 
began to have serious 
doubts about the whole 
business. Presently, 
after a brief pause, 
Hippodeides sent for a 
table; the table was 
brought, and 


could meet his demands; Queen Isabella. In 1487 he finally managed a 
meeting with the queen, and although he could not convince her to finance 
the voyage, he completely charmed her, and became a frequent guest in 
die palace. 

In 1492 the Spanish finally expelled the Moorish invaders who cen¬ 
turies earlier had seized parts of the country. With the wartime burden on 
her treasury lifted, Isabella felt she could finally respond to the demands of 
her explorer friend, and she decided to pay for three ships, equipment, the 
salaries of the crews, and a modest stipend for Columbus. More important, 
she had a contract drawn up that granted Columbus the titles and rights on 
which he had insisted. The only one she denied—and only in the contract’s 
fine print—was the 10 percent of all revenues from any lands discovered: 
an absurd demand, since he wanted no time limit on it (Had the clause 
been left in, it would eventually have made Columbus and his heirs the 
wealthiest family on the planet. Columbus never read the fine print) 

Satisfied that his demands had been met, Columbus set sail that same 
year in search of the passage to Asia. (Before he left he was careful to hire 
the best navigator he could find to help him get there.) The mission failed 
to find such a passage, yet when Columbus petitioned the queen to finance 
an even more ambitious voyage the following year, she agreed. By then 
she had come to see Columbus as destined for great things. 

Interpretation 

As an explorer Columbus was mediocre at best. He knew less about the 
sea than did the average sailor on his ships, could never determine the lati¬ 
tude and longitude of his discoveries, mistook islands for vast continents, 
and treated his crew badly. But in one area he was a genius: He knew how 
to sell himself. How else to explain how the son of a cheese vendor, a low- 
level sea merchant, managed to ingratiate himself with the highest royal 
and aristocratic families? 

Columbus had an amazing power to charm the nobility, and it all 
came from the way he carried himself. He projected a sense of confidence 
that was completely out of proportion to his means. Nor was his confidence 
the aggressive, ugly self-promotion of an upstart—it was a quiet and calm 
self-assurance. In fact it was the same confidence usually shown by the no¬ 
bility themselves. The powerful in the old-style aristocracies felt no need to 
prove or assert themselves; being noble, they knew they always deserved 
more, and asked for it. With Columbus, then, they felt an instant affinity, 
for he carried himself just the way they did—elevated above the crowd, 
destined for greatness. 

Understand: It is within your power to set your own price. How you 
carry yourself reflects what you think of yourself. If you ask for little, shuf¬ 
fle your feet and lower your head, people will assume this reflects your 
character. But this behavior is not you—it is only how you have chosen to 
present yourself to other people. You can just as easily present the Colum¬ 
bus front; buoyancy, confidence, and the feeling that you were bom to 
wear a crown. 


286 ' LAW 34 



With all great deceivers there is a notmorthy occurrence to which they owe their 
power. In the actual act of deception they are overcome by belief in themselves: it is 
this which then speaks so miraculously and compellingly to those around them. 
Friedrich Nietzsche, 1844-1900 


KEYS TO POWER 

As children, we start our lives with great exuberance, expecting and de¬ 
manding everything from the world. This generally carries over into our 
first forays into society, as we begin our careers. But as we grow older the 
rebuffs and failures we experience set up boundaries that only get firmer 
with time. Coming to expect less from the world, we accept limitations that 
are really self-imposed. We start to bow and scrape and apologize for even 
the simplest of requests. The solution to such a shrinking of horizons is to 
deliberately force ourselves in the opposite direction—to downplay the 
failures and ignore the limitations, to make ourselves demand and expect 
as much as the child. To accomplish this, we must use a particular strategy 
upon ourselves. Call it the Strategy of the Crown. 

The Strategy of the Crown is based on a simple chain of cause and ef¬ 
fect: If we believe we are destined for great things, our belief will radiate 
outward, just as a crown creates an aura around a king. This outward radi¬ 
ance will infect the people around us, who will think we must have reasons 
to feel so confident. People who wear crowns seem to feel no inner sense of 
the limits to what they can ask for or what they can accomplish. This too 
radiates outward. limits and boundaries disappear. Use the Strategy of the 
Crown and you will be surprised how often it bears fruit. Take as an exam¬ 
ple those happy children who ask for whatever they want, and get it. Their 
high expectations are their charm. Adults enjoy granting their wishes—just 
as Isabella enjoyed granting the wishes of Columbus. 

Throughout history', people of undistinguished birth—die Theodoras of 
t Byzantium, the Columbuses, the Beethovens, the Disraelis—have managed 
to work the Strategy of the Crown, believing so firmly in their own greatness 
that it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. The trick is simple; Be overcome 
by your self-belief. Even while you know you are practicing a kind of de¬ 
ception on yourself, act like a king. You are likely to be treated as one. 

The crown may separate you from other people, but it is up to you to 
make that separation real: You have to act differently, demonstrating your 
distance from those around you. One way to emphasize your difference is 
to always act with dignity, no matter the circumstance. Louis-Philippe gave 
no sense of being different from other people—he was the banker king. 
And the moment his subjects threatened him, he caved in. Everyone 
sensed this and pounced. Lacking regal dignity and firmness of purpose, 
Louis-Philippe seemed an impostor, and the crown was easily toppled 
from his head. 

Regal bearing should not be confused with arrogance. Arrogance may 
seem the king’s entitlement, but in fact it betrays insecurity. It is the very 
opposite of a royal demeanor. 


Hippodeides, climbing 
on to it, danced first 
some Laconian dances, 
next some Attic ones, 
and ended by standing 
on fits head and beat¬ 
ing rime with his legs in 
the air. The Laconian 
and Attic dances were, 
bad enough; hut 
Ckisthmes, though 
he already loathed the 
thought of having a 
son dn-law like that , 
nevertheless restrained 
himself and managed 
to avoid an outburst; 
but when he saw 
Hippod aides beating 
time with his legs, he 
could bear it no longer. 
"Son of Tisander." he 
cried, "you have 
danced away vour 
marriage. ” 

THE HISTORIES. 

Herodotus, 

FI PTH CENTURY B.C. 


LAW 34 


287 



Haile Selassie, ruler of Ethiopia for forty or so years beginning in 1930, 
was once a young man named Iij Tafari. He came from a noble family, but 
there was no real chance of him coming to power, for he was far down the 
line of succession from the king then on the throne, Menelik II. Neverthe¬ 
less, from an early age he exhibited a self-confidence and a royal bearing 
that surprised everyone around him. 

At the age of fourteen, Tafari went to live at the court, where he imme¬ 
diately impressed Menelik and became his favorite. Tafari’s grace under 
fire, his patience, and his calm self-assurance fascinated the king. Tire other 
young nobles, arrogant, blustery, and envious, would push this slight, 
bookish teenager around. But he never got angry—that would have been a 
sign of insecurity, to which he would not stoop. There were already people 
around him who felt he would someday rise to the top, for he acted as if he 
were already there. 

Years later, in 1936, when the Italian Fascists had taken over Ethiopia 
and Tafari, now called Haile Selassie, was in exile, he addressed die League 
of Nations to plead his country’s case. The Italians in the audience heckled 
him with vulgar abuse, but he maintained his dignified pose, as if com¬ 
pletely unaffected. This elevated him while making his opponents look 
even uglier. Dignity, in fact, is invariably the mask to assume under difficult 
circumstances; It is as if nothing can affect you, and you have all the time 
in the world to respond. This is an extremely powerful pose. 

A royal demeanor has other uses. Con artists have long known the 
value of an aristocratic front; it either disarms people and makes them less 
suspicious, or else it intimidates them and puts them on the defensive—and 
as Count Victor Lustig knew, once you put a sucker on the defensive he is 
doomed. The con man Yellow Kid Weil, too, would often assume the trap¬ 
pings of a man of wealth, along with the nonchalance that goes with them. 
Alluding to some magical method of making money, he would stand aloof, 
like a king, exuding confidence as if he really were fabulously rich. The 
suckers would beg to be in on the con, to have a chance at the wealth that 
he so dearly displayed. 

Finally, to reinforce the inner psychological tricks involved in project¬ 
ing a royal demeanor, there are outward strategies to help you create the 
effect. First, the Columbus Strategy: Always make a bold demand. Set your 
price high and do not waver. Second, in a dignified way, go after the high¬ 
est person in the building. This immediately puts you on the same plane as 
the chief executive you are attacking. It is the David and Goliath Strategy: 
By choosing a great opponent, you create the appearance of greatness. 

Third, give a gift of some sort to those above you. This is the strategy 
of those who have a patron: By giving your patron a gift, you are essentially 
saying that the two of you are equal It is the old con game of giving so that 
you can take. When the Renaissance writer Pietro Aretino wanted the 
Duke of Mantua as his next patron, he knew that if he was slavish and 
sycophantic, the duke would think him unworthy; so he approached the 
duke with gifts, in this case paintings by the writer’s good friend Titian. 


288 


LAW 34 



Accepting the gifts created a kind of equality between duke and writer: The 
duke was put at ease by the feeling that he was dealing with a man of his 
own aristocratic stamp. He funded Aretino generously. The gift strategy is 
subtle and brilliant because you do not beg: You ask for help in a dignified 
way that implies equality between two people, one of whom just happens 
to have more money. 

Remember: It is up to you to set your own price. Ask for less and that 
is just what you will get Ask for more, however, and you send a signal that 
you are worth a king’s ransom. Even those who turn you down respect you 
for your confidence, and that respect will eventually pay off in ways you 
cannot imagine. 


Image: The Crown. Place it upon your head 
and you assume a different pose—tranquil 
yet radiating assurance. Never show 
doubt, never lose your dignity beneath 
the crown, or it will not fit It will seem 
to be destined for one more worthy. Do 
not wait for a coronation; the great¬ 
est emperors crown themselves. 


Authority: Everyone should be royal after his own fashion. Let all your 
actions, even though they are not those of a king, be, in their own 
sphere, worthy of one. Be sublime in your deeds, lofty in your 
thoughts; and in all your doings show that you deserve to be a king 
even though you are not one in reality. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658) 



REVERSAL 

The idea behind the assumption of regal confidence is to set yourself apart 
from other people, but if you take this too far it will be your undoing. 
Never make the mistake of thinking that you elevate yourself by humiliat¬ 
ing people. Also, it is never a good idea to loom too high above the 
crowd—you make an easy target. And there are times when an aristocratic 
pose is eminently dangerous. 

Charles I, king of England during the 1640s, faced a profound public 
disenchantment with the institution of monarchy. Revolts erupted through¬ 
out the country, led by Oliver Cromwell. Had Charles reacted to the times 
with insight, supporting reforms and making a show of sacrificing some of 
his power, history might have been different. Instead he reverted to an 
even more regal pose, seeming outraged by the assault on his power and 
on the divine institution of monarchy. His stiff kingliness offended people 
and spurred on their revolts. And eventually Charles lost his head, literally. 
Understand: You are radiating confidence, not arrogance or disdain. 

Finally, it is true that you can sometimes find some power through af¬ 
fecting a kind of earthy vulgarity, which will prove amusing by its extreme¬ 
ness. But to the extent that you win this game by going beyond the limits, 
separating yourself from other people by appearing even more vulgar than 
they are, the game is dangerous: There will always be people more vulgar 
than you, and you will easily be replaced the following season by someone 
younger and worse. 



LAW 


35 

MASTER THE ART 
OF TIMING 


JUDGMENT 

Never seem to be in a hurry—hurrying betrays a lack of 
control over yourself and over time . Always seem pa¬ 
tient , as if you know that everything will come to you 
eventually . Become a detective of the right moment; sniff 
out the spirit of the times, the trends that will carry you to 
power. Learn to stand back token the time is not yet ripe , 
and to strike fiercely when it has reached fruition. 


291 



SKKTOHirS'S I..KSSON 

Seri onus's strength was 
now rapidly increasing, 
for all the tribes 
between the Ebro and 
the Pyrenees came over 
to his side, and troops 
came flocking daily to 
join him from every 
quarter. At the same 
time he was troubled 
by the lack of discipline 
and the overconfidence 
of these newly arrived 
barbarians, who would 
shout ut him to attack 
the enemy and had no 
patience with his delay¬ 
ing tactics, and he 
therefore tried to win 
them over by argument. 

But when he saw that 
they were discontented 
and persisted in press¬ 
ing their demands 
regardless of the 
circumstances, he let 
them have their way 
and allowed them to 
engage, the enemy; he 
hoped that they would 
suffer a severe defeat 
without being 
completely crushed, 
and that this would 
make them better 
disposed to obey his 
orders in future. 
The event turned out as 
he expected and Serto¬ 
rtus came to their 
rescue ., provided a 
rallying point for the 
fugitives, and led them 
safely back to his 
camp. His next step was 
to revive their dejected 
spirits, and so a few 
days later he 
summoned a general 
assembly. Before it he 
produced two horses, 
one of them old and 
enfeebled, the other 
large and lusty and 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

Starting out in life as a nondescript French seminary-school teacher, Joseph 
Fouche wandered from town to town for most of the decade of the 1780s, 
teaching mathematics to young boys. Yet he never completely committed 
himself to the church, never took his vows as a priest—he had bigger plans. 
Patiently waiting for his chance, he kept his options open. And when the 
French Revolution broke out, in 1789, Fouche waited no longer: He got rid 
of his cassock, grew his hair long, and became a revolutionary. For this was 
the spirit of the times. To miss the boat at this critical moment could have 
spelt disaster. Fouche did not miss the boat: Befriending the revolutionary 
leader Robespierre, he quickly rose in the rebel ranks. In 1792 die town of 
Nantes elected Fouche to be its representative to the National Convention 
(created that year to frame a new constitution for a French republic). 

When Fouche arrived in Paris to take his seat at the convention, a vio¬ 
lent rift had broken out between the moderates and the radical Jacobins. 
Fouche sensed that in the long run neither side would emerge victorious. 
Power rarely ends up in the hands of those who start a revolution, or even 
of those who further it; power sticks to those who bring it to a conclusion. 
That was the side Fouche wanted to be on. 

His sense of timing was uncanny. He started as a moderate, for moder¬ 
ates were in the majority. When the time came to decide on whether or not 
to execute Louis XVI, however, he saw that the people were clamoring for 
the king’s head, so he cast the deciding vote—for the guillotine. Now he 
had become a radical. Yet as tensions came to the boil in Paris, he foresaw 
the danger of being too closely associated with any one faction, so he ac¬ 
cepted a position in the provinces, where he could lie low for a while. A 
few months later he was assigned to the post of proconsul in Lyons, where 
he oversaw the execution of dozens of aristocrats. At a certain moment, 
however, he called a halt to the killings, sensing that the mood of the coun¬ 
try was turning—and despite the blood already on his hands, the citizens of 
Lyons hailed him as a savior from what had become known as the Terror. 

So far Fouche had played his cards brilliantly, but in 1794 his old 
friend Robespierre recalled him to Paris to account for his actions in Lyons. 
Robespierre had been the driving force behind the Terror. He had sent 
heads on both the right and the left rolling, and Fouche, whom he no 
longer trusted, seemed destined to provide the next head. Over the next 
few weeks, a tense struggle ensued: While Robespierre railed openly 
against Fouche, accusing of him dangerous ambitions and calling for his ar¬ 
rest, the crafty Fouche worked more indirectly, quietly gaining support 
among those who were beginning to tire of Robespierre’s dictatorial con¬ 
trol. Fouche was playing for time. He knew that the longer he survived, the 
more disaffected citizens he could rally against Robespierre. He had to 
have broad support before he moved against the powerful leader. He ral¬ 
lied support among both the moderates and the Jacobins, playing on the 
widespread fear of Robespierre—everyone was afraid of being the next to 
go to die guillotine. It all came to fruition on July 27: The convention 


292 


LAW 3.5 




turned against Robespierre, shouting down his usual lengthy speech. He 
was quickly arrested, and a few days later it was Robespierre’s head, not 
Fouche’s, that fell into the basket. 

When Fouche returned to the convention after Robespierre’s death, he 
played his most unexpected move: Having led the conspiracy against 
Robespierre, he was expected to sit with the moderates, but lo and behold, 
he once again changed sides, joining the radical Jacobins. For perhaps the 
first time in his life he aligned himself with the minority. Clearly he sensed 
a reaction stirring: He knew that the moderate faction that had executed 
Robespierre, and was now about to take power, would initiate a new round 
of the Terror, this time against the radicals. In siding with the Jacobins, 
then, Fouche was sitting with the martyrs of the days to come—the people 
who would be considered blameless in the troubles that were on their way. 
Taking sides with what was about to become the losing team was a risky 
gambit, of course, but Fouche must have calculated he could keep his head 
long enough to quietly stir up the populace against the moderates and 
watch them fall from power. And indeed, although the moderates did call 
for his arrest in December of 1795, and would have sent him to the guillo¬ 
tine, too much time had passed. The executions had become unpopular 
with the people, and Fouche survived tine swing of the pendulum one more 
time. 

A new government took over, the Directoire. It was not, however, a 
Jacobin government, but a moderate one—more moderate than the gov¬ 
ernment that had reimposed the Terror. Fouche, the radical, had kept his 
head, but now he had to keep a low profile. He waited patiently on the 
sidelines for several years, allowing time to soften any bitter feelings 
against him, then he approached the Directoire and convinced them he 
had a new passion: intelligence-gathering. He became a paid spy for the 
government, excelled at the job, and in 1799 was rewarded by being made 
minister of police. Now he was not just empowered but required to extend 
his spying to every comer of France—a responsibility that would greatly 
reinforce his natural ability to sniff out where the wind was blowing. One 
of the first social trends he detected, in fact, came in the person of 
Napoleon, a brash young general whose destiny he right away saw was en¬ 
twined with the future of France. When Napoleon unleashed a coup d’etat, 
on November 9, 1799, Fouche pretended to be asleep. Indeed he slept the 
whole day. For this indirect assistance—it might have been thought his job, 
after all, to prevent a military coup—Napoleon kept him on as minister of 
police in the new regime. 

Over the next few years, Napoleon came to rely on Fouche more and 
more. He even gave this former revolutionary a tide, duke of Otranto, and 
rewarded him with great wealth. By 1808, however, Fouche, always at¬ 
tuned to the times, sensed that Napoleon was on the downswing. His fiitile 
war with Spain, a country that posed no threat to France, was a sign that he 
was losing a sense of proportion. Never one to be caught on a sinking ship, 
Fouche conspired with Talleyrand to bring about Napoleon’s downfall. Al- 


possessing a flowing 
tail, which was remark¬ 
able for the thickness 
and beauty of its hair . 
By the side of the weak 
horse stood a tall 
strong man, and by the 
side of the powerful 
horse a short man of 
mean physique. At a 
signal the strong man 
seized the tail of his 
horse and tried with all 
his strength to pull it 
towards him, as if to 
tear it off while the 
weak man began to 
pull the hairs one by 
one from the tail of the 
strong horse. 

The strong man, after 
tugging with all his 
might to no purpose 
and causing the specta¬ 
tors a great deal of 
amusement in the 
process, finally gave up 
the attempt, while the 
weak man quickly and 
with very little trouble 
stripped his horse's tail 
completely bare. Then 
Sertorius rose to his 
feet and said, “Now 
you can see, my friends 
and allies, that perse¬ 
verance is more effec¬ 
tive. than brute strength, 
and that there are many 
difficulties (hat cannot 
be overcome if you try 
to do everything at 
once , but which will 
yield if you master 
them little by little. The 
truth is that a steady 
continuous effort is 
irresistible, for this is 
the way in which Time 
captures and subdues 
the greatest powers on 
earth. Now Time, you 
should remember, is a 
good friend and ally to 
those who use their 
intelligence to choose 
the right moment, but a 
most dangerous enemy 


LAW 35 i 293 



to those who rush into 
action at the wrong 
one. ” 

LIFE OF SERTORIUS, 

Plutarch, 
c. a.d. 46-120 


Mr. Shih had two sons: 
one loved learning; the 
other war. The first 
expounded his moral 
teachings at the 
admiring court of Ch ’i 
and was made a tutor 
while the second talked 
strategy at the bellicose 
court of Chat and was 
made a general. The 
impecunious Mr. Meng, 
hearing of these 
successes , sent his own 
two sons out to follow 
the example of the 
Shih boys. The first 
expounded his moral 
teachings at the court 
of Ch’in, but the King 
of Ch ’in said: “At 
present the states are 
quarreling violently 
and every prince is 
busy arming his troops 
to the teeth. If l 
followed this prig’s 
praiings we should 
soon be annihilated." 
So he had the fellow 
castrated. Meanwhile, 
the second brother 
displayed his military 
genius at the court of 
Wei. But the King of 
Wei said: “Mine is a 
weak state. If I relied 
on force instead of 
diplomacy, we should 
soon be wiped out. If 
on the other hand, I let 
this fire-eater go, he 
will offer his services to 
another state and then 


though the conspiracy failed—Talleyrand was fired; Fouche stayed, but 
was kept on a tight leash—it publicized a growing discontent with the em¬ 
peror, who seemed to be losing control. By 1814 Napoleon’s power had 
crumbled and allied forces finally conquered him. 

The next government was a restoration of the monarchy, in the form 
of King Louis XVIII, brother of Louis XVI. Fouche, his nose always sniff¬ 
ing the air for the next social shift, knew Louis would not last long—he had 
none of Napoleon’s flair. Fouche once again played his waiting game, lying 
low, staying away from the spotlight. Sure enough, in February' of 1815, 
Napoleon escaped from the island of Elba, where he had been imprisoned. 
Louis XVIII panicked: His policies had alienated the citizenry, who were 
clamoring for Napoleon’s return. So Louis turned to the one man who 
could maybe have saved his hide, Fouche, the former radical who had sent 
his brother, Louis XVI, to the guillotine, but was now one of the most pop¬ 
ular and widely admired politicians in France. Fouche, however, would not 
side with a loser: He refused Louis’s request for help by pretending that his 
help was unnecessary—by swearing that Napoleon would never return 
to power (although he knew otherwise). A short time later, of course, 
Napoleon and his new citizen army were closing in on Paris. 

Seeing his reign about to collapse, feeling that Fouche had betrayed 
him, and certain that he did not want this powerful and able man on 
Napoleon’s team. King Louis ordered the minister’s arrest and execution. 
On March 16, 1815, policemen surrounded Fouche’s coach on a Paris 
boulevard. Was this finally his end? Perhaps, but not immediately: Fouche 
told the police that an ex-member of government could not be arrested on 
the street. They fell for the story and allowed him to return home. Later 
that day, though, they came to his house and once again declared him 
under arrest. Fouche nodded—but would the officers be so kind as allow a 
gentleman to wash and to change his clothes before leaving his house for 
the last time? They gave their permission, Fouche left the room, and the 
minutes went by. Fouche did not return. Finally the policemen went into 
the next room—where they saw a ladder against an open window, leading 
down to the garden below. 

That day and the next the police combed Paris for Fouche, but by then 
Napoleon’s cannons were audible in the distance and the king and all the 
king’s men had to flee the city. As soon as Napoleon entered Paris, Fouche 
came out of hiding. He had cheated the executioner once again. Napoleon 
greeted his former minister of police and gladly restored him to his old 
post. During the 100 days that Napoleon remained in power, until Water¬ 
loo, it was essentially Fouche who governed France. After Napoleon fell, 
Louis XVIII returned to the throne, and like a cat with nine lives, Fouche 
stayed on to serve in yet another government—by then his power and in¬ 
fluence had grown so great that not even the king dared challenge him. 

Interpretation 

In a period of unprecedented turmoil, Joseph Fouche thrived through his 
mastery of the art of timing. He teaches us a number of key lessons. 


294 : LAW 3,5 



First, it is critical to recognize the spirit of the times. Fouche always 
looked two steps ahead, found the wave that would carry him to power, 
and rode it. You must always work with the times, anticipate twists and 
turns, and never miss the boat. Sometimes the spirit of the times is obscure: 
Recognize it not by what is loudest and most obvious in it, but by what lies 
hidden and dormant. Look forward to the Napoleons of the future rather 
than holding on to the ruins of the past. 

Second, recognizing the prevailing winds does not necessarily mean 
running with them. Any potent social movement creates a powerful reac¬ 
tion, and it is wise to anticipate what that reaction will be, as Fouche did 
after the execution of Robespierre. Rather than ride the cresting wave of 
the moment, wait for the tide’s ebb to carry you back to power. Upon occa¬ 
sion bet on the reaction that is brewing, and place yourself in the vanguard 
of it. 

Finally, Fouche had remarkable patience. Without patience as your 
sword and shield, your timing will fail and you will inevitably find yourself 
a loser. When the times were against Fouche, he did not struggle, get emo¬ 
tional, or strike out rashly. He kept his cool and maintained a low profile, 
patiently building support among the citizenry, the bulwark in his next rise 
to power. Whenever he found himself in the weaker position, he played for 
time, which he knew would always be his ally if he was patient. Recognize 
the moment, then, to hide in the grass or slither under a rock, as well as the 
moment to bare your fangs and attack. 

Space we can recover, time never ; 

Napoleon Bonaparte, 1769-1821 


KEYS TO POWER 

Time is an artificial concept that we ourselves have created to make the 
limitlessness of eternity and the universe more bearable, more human. 
Since we have constructed the concept of time, we are also able to mold it 
to some degree, to play tricks with it. The time of a child is long and slow, 
with vast expanses; the time of an adult whizzes by frighteningly fast. 
Time, then, depends on perception, which, we know, can be willfiilly al¬ 
tered. This is the first thing to understand in mastering the art of timing. If 
the inner turmoil caused by our emotions tends to make time move faster, 
it follows that once we control our emotional responses to events, time will 
move much more slowly. This altered way of dealing with things tends to 
lengthen our perception of future time, opens up possibilities that fear and 
anger close off, and allows us the patience that is the principal requirement 
in the art of timing. 

There are three kinds of time for us to deal with; each presents prob¬ 
lems that can be solved with skill and practice. First there is long time: the 
drawn-out, years-long kind of time that must be managed with patience 
and gentle guidance. Our handling of long time should be mostly defen¬ 
sive—this is the art of not reacting impulsively, of waiting for opportunity. 


we shall be in trouble. ” 
So he had the fellow's 
feet cut off Both fami¬ 
lies did exactly the 
same thing, but one 
timed it right, the other 
wrong. Thus success 
depends on ... rhythm. 
Lieh Tzu. quoted in 

THE CHINESE LOOKING 
GLASS, 

Dennis Blood worth, 
1967 


The sultan [of Persia] 
had sentenced two men 
to death. One of them, 
knowing how much the 
sultan loved his stal¬ 
lion, offered to teach 
the horse to fly within a 
year in return for his 
life. The sultan, fancy¬ 
ing himself as the rider 
of the only flying horse 
in the world, agreed. 
The other prisoner 
looked at his friend in 
disbelief. “You know 
horses don > fly. What 
made you come up 
with a crazy idea like 
that? You’re only post¬ 
poning the inevitable. ” 
“Not so, ” said the [first 
prisonerJ, “I have actu¬ 
ally given myself four 
chances for freedom. 
First, the sultan might 
die during the year 
Second, I might die. 
Third , the horse might 
die . And fourth ... I 
might teach the horse 
to fly r 

THE CRAFT OF POWER, 

R. G. H. Siu, 

1979 


LAW 35 295 



THF, THOHT AND 
THKCIDCKON 

A fisherman in the 
month of May stood 
angling on the bank of 
the Thames with an 
artificial fly. He threw 
his bait with so much 
art, that a young trout 
was rushing toward it, 
when she was 
prevented by her 
mother. “Never,"said 
she, "my child, be too 
precipitate, where there 
is a possibility of 
danger, lake due time 
to consider, before you 
risk an action that may¬ 
be fatal. How know 
you whether yon 
appearance be indeed a 
fly, or the snare of an 
enemy? Let someone 
else make the experi¬ 
ment before you. If it 
be a fly, he will very 
probably elude the first 
attack: and the second 
may be made, i f not 
with success, at least 
with safely. ” 
She had no sooner spo¬ 
ken , than a gudgeon 
seized the pretended 
fly, and became an 
example to the giddy 
daughter of the impor¬ 
tance of her mothers 
counsel . 

FABLES. 

Robert Dodsley, 
1703-1764 


Next there is forced time: the short-term time that we can manipulate as an 
offensive weapon, upsetting the timing of our opponents. Finally there is 
end time, when a plan must be executed with speed and force. We have 
waited, found the moment, mid must not hesitate. 

Long Time. The famous seventeenth-century Ming painter Chou Yung 
relates a story that altered his behavior forever. Late one winter afternoon 
he set out to visit a town that lay across the river from his own town. He 
was bringing some important books and papers with him and had commis¬ 
sioned a young boy to help him carry them. As the ferry neared the other 
side of the river, Chou Yung asked the boatman if they would have time to 
get to the town before its gates closed, since it was a mile away and night 
was approaching. The boatman glanced at the boy, and at the bundle of 
loosely tied papers and books—“Yes,” he replied, “if you do not walk too 
fast.” 

As they started out, however, the sun was setting. Afraid of being 
locked out of the town at night, prey to local bandits, Chou and the boy 
walked faster and faster, finally breaking into a run. Suddenly the string 
around the papers broke and the documents scattered on the ground. It 
took them many minutes to put the packet together again, and by the time 
they had reached the city gates, it was too late. 

When you force the pace out of fear and impatience, you create a nest 
of problems that require fixing, and you end up taking much longer than if 
you had taken your time. Hurriers may occasionally get there quicker, but 
papers fly everywhere, new dangers arise, and they find themselves in con¬ 
stant crisis mode, fixing the problems that they themselves have created. 
Sometimes not acting in the face of danger is your best move—you wait, 
you deliberately slow down. As time passes it will eventually present op¬ 
portunities you had not imagined. 

Waiting involves controlling not only your own emotions but those of 
your colleagues, who, mistaking action for power, may try to push you into 
making rash moves. In your rivals, on the other hand, you can encourage 
this same mistake: If you let diem rush headlong into trouble while you 
stand back and wait, you will soon find ripe moments to intervene and pick 
up the pieces. This wise policy was the principal strategy of the great early- 
seventeenth-century emperor Tokugawa Ieyasu of Japan. When his prede¬ 
cessor, the headstrong Hideyoshi, whom he served as a general, staged a 
rash invasion of Korea, Ieyasu did not involve himself. He knew the inva¬ 
sion would be a disaster and would lead to Hideyoshfs downfall Better to 
stand patiendy on the sidelines, even for many years, and then be in position 
to seize power when the time is right—exactly what Ieyasu did, with great 
artistry. 

You do not deliberately slow time down to live longer, or to take more 
pleasure in the moment, but the better to play the game of power. First, 
when your mind is uncluttered by constant emergencies you will see fur¬ 
ther into the future. Second, you will be able to resist the baits that people 


296 1 LAW 35 



dangle in front of you, and will keep yourself from becoming another im¬ 
patient sucker. Third, you will have more room to be flexible. Opportuni¬ 
ties will inevitably arise that you had not expected and would have missed 
had you forced the pace. Fourth, you will not move from one deal to the 
next without completing the first one. To build your power’s foundation 
can take years; make sure that foundation is secure. Do not be a flash in the 
pan—success that is built up slowly and surely is the only kind that lasts. 

Finally, slowing time down will give you a perspective on the times 
you live in, letting you take a certain distance and putting you in a less 
emotionally charged position to see the shapes of things to come. Hurriers 
will often mistake surface phenomena for a real trend, seeing only what 
they want to see. How much better to see what is really happening, even if 
it is unpleasant or makes your task harder. 

Forced Time. The trick in forcing time is to upset the timing of others—to 
make them hurry, to make them wait, to make them abandon their own 
pace, to distort their perception of time. By upsetting the timing of your op¬ 
ponent while you stay patient, you open up time for yourself, which is half 
the game. 

In 1473 the great Turkish sultan Mehmed the Conqueror invited nego¬ 
tiations with Hungary to end the off-and-on war die two countries had 
waged for years. When die Hungarian emissary arrived in Thrkey to start 
the talks, Turkish officials humbly apologized—Mehmed had just left Istan¬ 
bul, the capital, to batde his longtime foe, Uzun Hasan. But he urgently 
wanted peace with Hungary, and had asked that the emissary join him at 
the front. 

When the emissary arrived at the site of the fighting, Mehmed had al¬ 
ready left it, moving eastward in pursuit of his swift foe. This happened 
several times. Wherever the emissary stopped, the lurks lavished gifts and 
banquets on him, in pleasurable but time-consuming ceremonies. Finally 
Mehmed defeated Uzun and met with the emissary. Yet his terms for peace 
with Hungary' were excessively harsh. After a few days, the negotiations 
ended, and the usual stalemate remained in place. But this was fine with 
Mehmed. In fact he had planned it that way all along: Plotting his cam¬ 
paign against Uzun, he had seen that diverting his armies to the east would 
leave his western flank vulnerable. To prevent Hungary from taking advan¬ 
tage of his weakness and his preoccupation elsewhere, he first dangled the 
lure of peace before his enemy, then made them wait—all on his own 
terms. 

Making people wait is a powerful way of forcing time, as long as they 
do not figure out what you are up to. You control the clock, they linger in 
limbo—and rapidly come unglued, opening up opportunities for you to 
strike. The opposite effect is equally powerful: You make your opponents 
hurry. Start off your dealings with them slowly, then suddenly apply pres¬ 
sure, making them feel that everything is happening at once. People who 
lack the time to think will make mistakes—so set their deadlines for them. 



This was the technique Machiavelli admired in Cesare Borgia, who, during 
negotiations, would suddenly press vehemently for a decision, upsetting 
his opponent’s timing and patience. For who would dare make Cesare 
wait? 

Joseph Duveen, the famous art dealer, knew that if he gave an indeci¬ 
sive buyer like John D. Rockefeller a deadline—the painting had to leave 
the country, another tycoon was interested in it—the client would buy just 
in time. Freud noticed that patients who had spent years in psychoanalysis 
without improvement would miraculously recover just in time if he fixed a 
definite date for the end of the therapy. Jacques Lacan, the famous French 
psychoanalyst, used a variation on this tactic—he would sometimes end 
the customary hour session of therapy after only ten minutes, without 
warning. After this happened several times, the patient would realize that 
he had better make maximum use of the time, rather than wasting much of 
the hour with a lot of talk that meant nothing. The deadline, then, is a pow¬ 
erful tool. Close off the vistas of indecision and force people to make up 
their damn minds or get to the point—never let them make you play on 
their excruciating terms. Never give them time. 

Magicians and showmen are experts in forcing time. Houdini could 
often wriggle free of handcuffs in minutes, but he would draw the escape 
out to an hour, making the audience sweat, as time came to an apparent 
standstill. Magicians have always known that the best way to alter our per¬ 
ception of time is often to slow down the pace. Creating suspense brings 
time to a terrifying pause: The slower the magician’s hands move, the eas¬ 
ier it is to create the illusion of speed, making people think the rabbit has 
appeared instantaneously. The great nineteenth-century magician Jean-Eu- 
gene Robert-Houdin took explicit notice of this effect: “The more slowly a 
story is told,” he said, “the shorter it seems.” 

Going slower also makes what you are doing more interesting—the 
audience yields to your pace, becomes entranced. It is a state in which time 
whizzes delightfully by. You must practice such illusions, which share in the 
hypnotist’s power to alter perceptions of time. 

End Time. You can play the game with the utmost artistry—waiting pa¬ 
tiently for the right moment to act, putting your competitors off their form 
by messing with their timing—but it won’t mean a thing unless you know 
how to finish. Do not be one of those people who look like paragons of pa¬ 
tience but are actually just afraid to bring things to a close: Patience is 
worthless unless combined with a willingness to fall ruthlessly on your op¬ 
ponent at the right moment. You can wait as long as necessary for the con¬ 
clusion to come, but when it comes it must come quickly. Use speed to 
paralyze your opponent, cover up any mistakes you might make, and im¬ 
press people with your aura of au thority and finality. 

With the patience of a snake charmer, you draw the snake out with 
calm and steady rhythms, Once the snake is out, though, would you dangle 
your foot above its deadly head? There is never a good reason to allow' the 




slightest hitch in your endgame. Your mastery of timing can really only be 
judged by how you work with end time—how you quickly change the pace 
and bring things to a swift and definitive conclusion. 


Image; The Hawk. Patiently and silently it circles the sky, high 
above, ail-seeing with its powerful eyes. Those below have 
no awareness that they are being tracked. Suddenly, 
when the moment arrives, the hawk swoops 
down with a speed that cannot be de¬ 
fended against; before its prey 
knows what has happened, 
the bird's viseiike talons 
have carried it 
up into the 
sky. 


Authority: There is a tide in (lie affairs of men, / Which, taken at the flood, 
leads on to fortune; / Omitted, all the voyage of their life / Is bound in 
shallows and in miseries. {Julius Caesar , William Shakespeare, 1564-161(1) 


REVERSAL 

There is no power to be gained in letting go of the reins and adapting to 
whatever time brings. To some degree yon must guide time or you will be 
its merciless victim. There is accordingly no reversal to this law. 




LAW 


36 

DISDAIN THINGS 
YOU CANNOT HAVE: 
IGNORING THEM IS 
THE BEST REVENGE 

JUDGMENT 

By acknowledging a petty problem you give it existence 
and credibility. The more attention you pay an enemy f 
the stronger you make him; and a small mistake is often 
made worse and more visible when you try to fix it ft is 
sometimes best to leave things a lone , If there is something 
you want but cannot have, show contempt for it. The less 
interest you reveal , the more superior you seem. 



TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

The Mexican rebel leader Pancho Villa started out as the chief of a gang of 
bandits, but after revolution broke out in Mexico in 1910, he became a 
kind of folk hero—robbing trains and giving the money to the poor, lead¬ 
ing daring raids, and charming the ladies with romantic escapades. His ex¬ 
ploits fascinated Americans—he seemed a man from another era, part 
Robin Hood, part Don Juan. After a few years of bitter fighting, however, 
General Carranza emerged as the victor in the Revolution; the defeated 
Villa and his troops went back home, to the northern state of Chihuahua. 
His army dwindled and he turned to banditry again, damaging his popu¬ 
larity. Finally, perhaps out of desperation, he began to rail against the 
United States, the gringos, whom he blamed for his troubles. 

In March of 1916, Pancho Villa raided Columbus, New Mexico. Ram¬ 
paging through the town, he and his gang killed seventeen American sol¬ 
diers and civilians. President Woodrow Wilson, like many Americans, had 
admired Villa; now, however, the bandit needed to be punished. Wilson’s 
advisers urged him to send troops into Mexico to capture Villa. For a 
power as large as the United States, they argued, not to strike back at an 
army that had invaded its territory would send the worst kind of signal. 
Furthermore, they continued, many Americans saw Wilson as a pacifist, a 
principle the public doubted as a response to violence; he needed to prove 
his mettle and manliness by ordering the use of force. 

The pressure on Wilson was strong, and before the month was out, 
with the approval of the Carranza government, he sent an army of ten 
thousand soldiers to capture Pancho Villa. The venture was called the 
Punitive Expedition, and its leader was the dashing General John J. Persh¬ 
ing, who had defeated guerrillas in the Philippines and Native Americans 
in the American Southwest. Certainly Pershing could find and overpower 
Pancho Villa. 

The Punitive Expedition became a sensational story, and carloads of 
U.S. reporters followed Pershing into action. The campaign, they wrote, 
would be a test of American power. The soldiers earned the latest in 
weaponry’, communicated by radio, and were supported by reconnais¬ 
sance from the air. 

In the first few months, the troops split up into small units to comb the 
wilds of northern Mexico. The Americans offered a $50,000 reward for in¬ 
formation leading to Villa’s capture. But the Mexican people, who had 
been disillusioned with Villa when he had returned to banditry, now idol¬ 
ized him for facing this mighty American army. They began to give Persh¬ 
ing false leads: Villa had been seen in this village, or in that mountain 
hideaway, airplanes would be dispatched, troops would scurry after them, 
and no one would ever see him. The wily bandit seemed to be always one 
step ahead of the American military. 

By the summer of that year, the expedition had swelled to 123,000 
men. They suffered through the stultifying heat, the mosquitoes, the wild 
terrain. Trudging over a countryside in which they were already resented, 


THE FOX AM) 

THE CRAPES 

A starving fox ... 
saw a duster 
Of luscious-looking 
grapes of purplish 
luster 

Dangling abo ve him on 
a trellis-frame. 

He would have dearly 
liked them for his 
lunch. 

But when he tried and 
failed to reach the 
bunch: 

“Ah well, it's more than 
likely they're not 
sweet — 

Good only for green 
fools to eat!” 

Wasn’t he. wise to say 
they were unripe. 
Rather than whine 
and gripe? 

FABLES. 

Jean de La Fontaine, 
1621-1695 


Once when G. K. 
Chesterton's economic 
views were abused in 
print hv George 
Bernard Shaw, his 
friends waited in vain 
for him to reply. 
Historian Hilaire 
Belloc reproached him. 
“My dear Belloc, ” 
Chesterton said. “/ 
have answered him. 

To a man of Shaw s 
wit, silence is the one 
unbearable repartee. ” 

THE LITTLE, BROWN 
BOOK OF ANECDOTES. 

Clifton Fadiman, ed., 
1985 


LAW 36 i 301 



Till. ASS AM) 

itik (-ahdi:ni:r 

An ass had once by 
some accident lost his 
tail, which was a griev¬ 
ous affliction to him; 
and he was everywhere 
seeking after it, being 
fool enough to think he 
could get it set on 
again. He passed 
through a meadow, and 
afterwards got into a 
garden. The gardener 
seeing him, and not 
able to endure the 
mischief he was doing 
in trampling down his 
plants, jell into a 
violent rage, ran to the 
ass, and never standing 
on the ceremony of a 
pillory, cut off both his 
ears, and beat him out 
of the ground. Thus the 
ass, who bemoaned the 
loss of his tail, was in 
far greater affliction 
when he saw himself 
without ears. 

FABLES, 

PlLPAY, 

India, 

FOURTH CENTURY 


Till: l’HODICY OX 

Once, when the Toku- 
daiji minister of the 
right was chief of the 
imperial police, he was 
holding a meeting of 
his staff at the middle 
gate when an ox 
belonging to an official 
named Akikane got 
loose and wandered 
into the ministry build¬ 
ing. It climbed up on 


they infuriated both the local people and the Mexican government. At one 
point Pancho Villa hid in a mountain cave to recover from a gunshot 
wound he received in a skirmish with the Mexican army; looking down 
from his aerie, he could watch Pershing lead the exhausted American 
troops back and forth across the mountains, never getting any closer to 
their goal. 

All the way into winter, Villa played his cat-and-mouse game. Ameri¬ 
cans came to see the affair as a kind of slapstick farce—in fact they began to 
admire Villa again, respecting his resourcefulness in eluding a superior 
force. In January of 1917, Wilson finally ordered Pershing’s withdrawal. As 
the troops made their way back to American territory, rebel forces pursued 
them, forcing the U.S. Army to use airplanes to protect its rear flanks. The 
Punitive Expedition was being punished itself—it had turned into a retreat 
of the most humiliating sort. 

Interpretation 

Woodrow Wilson organized the Punitive Expedition as a show of force: He 
would teach Pancho Villa a lesson and in the process show the world that 
no one, large or small, could attack the mighty United States and get away 
with it. The expedition would be over in a few weeks, and Villa would be 
forgotten. 

That was not how it played out. The longer the expedition took, the 
more it focused attention on the Americans’ incompetence and on Villa’s 
cleverness. Soon what was forgotten was not Villa but the raid that had 
started it all. As a minor annoyance became an international embarrass¬ 
ment, and the enraged Americans dispatched more troops, the imbalance 
between the size of the pursuer and the size of the pursued—who still man¬ 
aged to stay free—made the affair a joke. And in the end this white ele¬ 
phant of an army had to lumber out of Mexico, humiliated. The Punitive 
Expedition did the opposite of what it set out to do: It left Villa not only 
free but more popular than ever. 

What could Wilson have done differently? He could have pressured 
the Carranza government to catch Villa for him. Alternatively, since many 
Mexicans had tired of Villa before the Punitive Expedition began, he could 
have worked quietly with them and won their support for a much smaller 
raid to capture the bandit. He could have organized a trap on the Ameri¬ 
can side of the border, anticipating the next raid. Or he could have ignored 
the matter altogether for the time being, waiting for the Mexicans them¬ 
selves to do away with Villa of their own accord. 

Remember: You choose to let things bother you. You can just as easily 
choose not to notice the irritating offender, to consider the matter trivial 
and unworthy of your interest That is the powerful move. What you do 
not react to cannot drag you down in a futile engagement. Your pride is not 
involved. The best lesson you can teach an irritating gnat is to consign it to 
oblivion by ignoring it. If it is impossible to ignore (Pancho Villa had in fact 
killed American citizens), then conspire in secret to do away with it, but 


302 LAW 36 



never inadvertently draw attention to the bothersome insect that will go 
away or die on its own. If you waste time and energy in such entangle¬ 
ments, it is your own fault. Learn to play the card of disdain and turn your 
back on what cannot harm you in the long run. 


Just think—it cost your government $130 million to try to get me . / took them 
over rough, hilly country , Sometimes forfifty miles at a stretch they had no tvater: 
They had nothing hut the sun and mosquitoes .... And nothing was gained. 
Poncho Villa, 1878-1923 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

In the year 1527, King Henry VIII of England decided he had to find a 
way to get rid of his wife, Catherine of Aragon. Catherine had failed to pro¬ 
duce a son, a male heir who would ensure the continuance of his dynasty, 
and Henry thought he knew why: He had read in the Bible the passage, 
“And if a man shall take his brother’s wife, it is an unclean thing: he hath 
uncovered Ins brother’s nakedness; they shall be childless.” Before marry¬ 
ing Henry, Catherine had married his older brother Arthur, but Arthur 
had died five months later. Henry had waited an appropriate time, then 
had married his brother’s widow. 

Catherine was the daughter of King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of 
Spain, and by marrying her Henry had kept alive a valuable alliance. Now, 
however, Catherine had to assure him that her brief marriage with Arthur 
had never been consummated. Otherwise Henry would view their rela¬ 
tionship as incestuous and their marriage as null and void. Catherine in¬ 
sisted that she had remained a virgin through her marriage to Arthur, and 
Pope Clement VII supported her by giving his blessing to the union, which 
he could not have done had he considered it incestuous. Yet after years of 
marriage to Henry, Catherine had failed to produce a son, and in the early 
1520s she had entered menopause. To the king this could only mean one 
thing: She had lied about her virginity, their union was incestuous, and 
God had punished them. 

There was another reason why Henry wanted to get rid of Catherine: 
He had fallen in love with a younger woman, Anne Boleyn. Not only was 
he in love with her, but if he married her he could still hope to sire a legiti¬ 
mate son. The marriage to Catherine had to be annulled. For this, how¬ 
ever, Henry had to apply to the Vatican. But Pope Clement would never 
annul the marriage. 

By the summer of 1527, rumors spread throughout Europe that Henry 
was about to attempt the impossible—to annul his marriage against 
Clement’s wishes. Catherine would never abdicate, let alone voluntarily 
enter a nunnery, as Henry had urged her, But Henry had his own strategy: 
He stopped sleeping in the same bed with Catherine, since he considered 
her his sister-in-law, not his lawful wife. He insisted on calling her Princess 


(he dais where the chief 
hw seated and lay 
there, chewing its cud. 
Everyone was sure that 
this was some grave 
portent, and urged that 
the ox be sent to a yin- 
yang diviner. However, 
the prime minister ; the 
father o f the minister of 
the right, said, “An ox 
has no discrimination. 

It has legs—there is 
nowhere, it won’t go. ft 
does not make sense to 
deprive an underpaid 
official of the. wretched 
ox he needs in order to 
attend court. ” He 
returned the ox to its 
owner and changed the 
matting on which it had 
lain. No untoward 
event of any kind 
occurred afterward. 
They say that if you see 
a prodigy and do not 
treat it as such, its char¬ 
acter as a prodigy is 
destroyed. 

ESSAYS IN IDLENESS. 
ReNKO, 

Japan, 

FOURTEENTH CENTURY 


LAW 36 


303 




And in this view it is 
advisable to let everyone 
of your acquaintance — 
whether man or 
woman—feel now and 
then that you could 
very well dispense with 
their company. This 
will consolidate 
friendship. Nay, with 
most people, there will 
be no harm in occa¬ 
sionally mixing a grain 
of disdain with your 
treatment of them; that 
will make them value 
your friendship all the 
more. Chi non stima 
vien stimato, as a 
subtle Italian proverb 
has it—to disregard is 
to win regard. But if we. 
really think very highly 
of a person, n ! cr should 
conceal it from him 
like u crime. This is not 
a very gratifying thing 
to do, but it is right. 
Why, a dog will not 
bear being treated too 
kindly, let alone a man'. 

Arthur 

Schopenhauer, 

1788-1860 


T1IK MONKI V AND 
I IIK PEAS 

A monkey was carry¬ 
ing two handfuls of 
peas. One little pea 
dropped out. He tried 
to pick it up, and spill 
twenty. He tried to pick 
up the twenty, and spilt 
them all. Then he lost 
his temper, scattered the. 
peas in till directions, 
and ran away. 

FABLES, 

Leo Tolstoy. 
1828-1910 


Dowager of Wales, her title as Arthur’s widow. Finally, in 1531, he ban¬ 
ished her from court and shipped her off to a distant castle. The pope or¬ 
dered him to return her to court, on pain of excommunication, the most 
severe penalty a Catholic could suffer. Henry not only ignored this threat, 
he insisted that his marriage to Catherine had been dissolved, and in 1533 
he married Anne Boleyn. 

Clement refused to recognize the marriage, but Henry did not care. 
He no longer recognized the pope’s authority, and proceeded to break 
with the Roman Catholic Church, establishing the Church of England in 
its stead, with the king as the head of the new church. And so, not surpris¬ 
ingly, the newly formed Church of England proclaimed Anne Boleyn Eng¬ 
land’s rightful queen. 

The pope tried every threat in the book, but nothing worked. Henry 
simply ignored him. Clement fumed—no one had ever treated him so con¬ 
temptuously. Henry had humiliated him and he had no power of recourse. 
Even excommunication (which he constantly threatened but never carried 
out) would no longer matter. 

Catherine too felt the devastating sting of Henry’s disdain. She tried to 
fight back, but in appealing to Henry her words fell on deaf ears, and soon 
they fell on no one’s. Isolated from the court, ignored by the king, mad 
with anger and frustration, Catherine slowly deteriorated, and finally died 
in January of 1536, from a cancerous tumor of the heart 

Interpretation 

When you pay attention to a person, the two of you become partners of 
sorts, each moving in step to the actions and reactions of the other. In the 
process you lose your initiative. It is a dynamic of all interactions: By ac¬ 
knowledging other people, even if only to fight with them, you open your¬ 
self to their influence. Had Henry locked horns with Catherine, he would 
have found himself mired in endless arguments that would have weakened 
his resolve and eventually worn him down. (Catherine was a strong, stub¬ 
born woman.) Had he set out to convince Clement to change his verdict on 
the marriage’s validity, or tried to compromise and negotiate with him, he 
would have gotten bogged down in Clement’s favorite tactic: playing for 
time, promising flexibility, but actually getting what popes always got— 
their way. 

Henry would have none of this. He played a devastating power 
game—total disdain. By ignoring people you cancel them out. This unset¬ 
tles and infuriates them—but since they have no dealings with you, there is 
nothing they can do. 

This is the offensive aspect of the law. Playing the card of contempt is 
immensely powerful, for it lets you determine the conditions of the conflict. 
The war is waged on your terms. This is the ultimate power pose: You are 
the king, and you ignore what offends you. Watch how this tactic infuriates 
people—half of what they do is to get your attention, and when you with¬ 
hold it from them, they flounder in frustration. 


304 LAW 36 



MAN: Kick kirn — he'll forgive you. Flatter him—he may or may not 
see through you . But ignore him and he ’ll hate you, 

/dries Shah , Caravan of Dreams, 1968 


KEYS TO POWER 

Desire often creates paradoxical effects: The more you want something, 
the more you chase after it, the more it eludes you. The more interest you 
show, the more you repel the object of your desire. This is because your in¬ 
terest is too strong—it makes people awkward, even fearful. Uncontrol¬ 
lable desire makes you seem weak, unworthy, pathetic. 

You need to turn your back on what you want, show your contempt 
and disdain. This is the kind of powerful response that will drive your tar¬ 
gets crazy. They will respond with a desire of their own, which is simply to 
have an effect on you—perhaps to possess you, perhaps to hurt you. If they 
want to possess you, you have successfully completed the first step of se¬ 
duction. If they want to hurt you, you have unsettled them and made them 
play by your rules (see Laws 8 and 39 on baiting people into action). 

Contempt is (he prerogative of the king. Where his eyes turn, what he 
decides to see, is what has reality ; what he ignores and turns his back on is 
as good as dead. That was the weapon of King Louis XIV—if he did not 
like you, he acted as if you were not there, maintaining his superiority by 
cutting off the dynamic of interaction. This is the power you have when 
you play the card of contempt, periodically showing people that you can 
do without them. 

If choosing to ignore enhances your power, it follows that the opposite 
approach—commitment and engagement—often weakens you. By paying 
undue attention to a puny enemy, you look puny, and the longer it takes 
you to crush such an enemy, the larger the enemy seems. When Athens set 
out to conquer the island of Sicily, in 415 B.C., a giant power was attacking a 
tiny one. Yet by entangling Athens in a long-drawn-out conflict, Syracuse, 
Sicily’s most important city-state, was able to grow in stature and confi¬ 
dence. Finally defeating Athens, it made itself famous for centuries to 
come. In recent times, President John F. Kennedy made a similar mistake 
in his attitude to Fidel Castro of Cuba: His failed invasion at the Bay of 
Pigs, in 1961, made Castro an international hero. 

A second danger: If you succeed in crushing the irritant, or even if you 
merely wound it, you create sympathy for the weaker side. Critics of 
Franklin D. Roosevelt complained bitterly about the money his adminis¬ 
tration spent on government projects, but their attacks had no resonance 
with the public, who saw the president as working to end the Great De¬ 
pression. His opponents thought they had an example that would show just 
how wasteful he had become: his dog, Faia, which he lavished with favors 
and attention. Critics railed at his insensitivity—spending taxpayers’ 
money on a dog while so many Americans were still in poverty. But Roo¬ 
sevelt had a response: How dare his critics attack a defenseless little dog? 


As some make gossip 
out of everything, so 
others make much ado 
about everything. They 
are always talking big . 
[andj take everything 
seriously, making a 
quarrel and a mystery 
of it. You should take 
very few grievances to 
heart, for to do so is to 
give yourself ground¬ 
less worry. U is a topsy¬ 
turvy way of behaving 
to take to heart cares 
which you ought to 
throw over your shoul¬ 
der. Many things which 
seemed important [at 
the time) turn out to be 
of no account when 
they are ignored; and 
others, which seem 
trifling, appear formi¬ 
dable when you pay 
attention to them. 
Things can easily be 
settled at the outset, but 
not so later on. In 
many cases, the remedy 
itself is the cause of the 
disease: to let things be 
is not the least satisfac¬ 
tory of life's rules. 

Baltasar GkaciAn, 
1601-1658 


LAW 36 


305 




THE MAN AND 
MIH SH.A 1)0 Vi 

There wai’ a certain 
original man who 
desired to catch his 
own shadow. He makes 
a step or two toward it, 
hut it moves away from 
him. lie quickens his 
pace; it does the same. 
At last he takes to 
running; hut the 
quicker he goes , the 
quicker runs the 
shadow also, utterly 
refusing to give itself 
up, just as if it had been 
a treasure. But seel our 
eccentric friend 
suddenly turns round, 
and walks away from 
it. And presently he 
looks behind him; now 
the shadow runs 
after him. 
Ladies fair, 1 have 
often observed ... that 
Fortune treats us in a 
similar way. One man 
tries with all his might 
to seize the goddess, 
and only loses his time 
and his trouble. 
Another seems, to all 
appearance, to be 
running out of her 
sight: hut , no: she 
herself takes a pleasure 
in pursuing him . 

TABLES. 

Ivan Krh.ofk 
1768-1844 


His speech in defense of Fala was one of the most popular he ever gave. In 
this case, the weak party involved was the president’s dog and the attack 
backfired—in the long run, it only made the president more sympathetic, 
since many people will naturally side with die “underdog,” just as the 
American public came to sympathize with the wily but outnumbered Pan- 
cho Villa. 

It is tempting to want to fix our mistakes, but the harder we try, the 
worse we often make them. It is sometimes more politic to leave them 
alone. In 1971, when the New York Times published the Pentagon Papers, a 
group of government documents about the history of U.S. involvement in 
Indochina, Henry Kissinger erupted into a volcanic rage. Furious about the 
Nixon administration’s vulnerability to this kind of damaging leak, he 
made recommendations that eventually led to the formation of a group 
called the Plumbers to plug the leaks. This was the unit that later broke into 
Democratic Party offices in the Watergate Hotel, setting off the chain of 
events that led to Nixon’s downfall. In reality the publication of the Penta¬ 
gon Papers was not a serious threat to the administration, but Kissinger’s 
reaction made it a big deal. In trying to fix one problem, he created an¬ 
other: a paranoia for security that in the end was much more destructive to 
the government. Had he ignored the Pentagon Papers, the scandal they 
had created would eventually have blown over. 

Instead of inadvertendy focusing attention on a problem, making it 
seem worse by publicizing how much concern and anxiety it is causing 
you, it is often far wiser to play the contemptuous aristocrat, not deigning 
to acknowledge the problem’s existence. There are several ways to execute 
this strategy. 

First there is the sour-grapes approach. If there is something you want 
but that you realize you cannot have, the worst thing you can do is draw at¬ 
tention to your disappointment by complaining about it. An infinitely 
more powerful tactic is to act as if it never really interested you in the first 
place. When the writer George Sand’s supporters nominated her to be the 
first female member of the Academic Fran^aise, in 1861, Sand quickly saw 
that the academy would never admit her. Instead of whining, though, she 
claimed she had no interest in belonging to this group of worn-out, over¬ 
rated, out-of-touch windbags. Her disdain was the perfect response: Had 
she shown her anger at her exclusion, she would have revealed how much 
it meant to her. Instead she branded the academy a club of old men—and 
why should she be angry or disappointed at not having to spend her time 
with them? Crying “sour grapes” is sometimes seen as a reflection of the 
weak; it is actually the tactic of the powerful. 

Second, when you are attacked by an inferior, deflect people’s atten¬ 
tion by making it clear that tile attack has not even registered. Look away, 
or answer sweetly, showing how little the attack concerns you. Similarly, 
when you yourself have committed a blunder, the best response is often to 
make less of your mistake by treating it lightly. 

The Japanese emperor Go-Saiin, a great disciple of the tea ceremony, 


306 LAW 36 



owned a priceless antique tea bowl that all the courtiers envied. One day a 
guest, Dainagon Tsunehiro, asked if he could carry the tea bowl into the 
light, to examine it more closely. The bowl rarely left the table, but the em¬ 
peror was in good spirits and he consented. As Dainagon carried the bowl 
to the railing of the verandah, however, and held it up to the light, it 
slipped from his hands and fell on a rock in the garden below, smashing 
into tiny fragments. 

The emperor of course was furious. "It was indeed most clumsy of me 
to let it drop in this way,” said Dainagon, with a deep bow, "but really 
there is not much harm done. This Ido tea-bowl is a very old one and it is 
impossible to say how much longer it would have lasted, but anyhow it is 
not a thing of any public use, so I think it rather fortunate that it has broken 
thus.” This surprising response had an immediate effect: The emperor 
calmed down. Dainagon neither sniveled nor overapologized, but signaled 
his own worth and power by treating his mistake with a touch of disdain. 
The emperor had to respond with a similar aristocratic indifference; his 
anger had made him seem low and petty—an image Dainagon was able to 
manipulate. 

Among equals this tactic might backfire: Your indifference could make 
you seem callous. But with a master, if you act quickly and without great 
hiss, it can work to great effect: You bypass his angry' response, save him 
the time and energy he would waste by brooding over it, and allow him the 
opportunity to display his own lack of pettiness publicly. 

If we make excuses and denials when we axe caught in a mistake or a 
deception, we stir the waters and make the situation worse. It is often wiser 
to play things the opposite way. The Renaissance writer Pietro Aretino 
often boasted of his aristocratic lineage, which was, of course, a fiction, 
since he was actually the son of a shoemaker. When an enemy of his finally 
revealed the embarrassing truth, word quickly spread, and soon all of 
Venice (where he lived at the time) was aghast at Aretino’s lies. Had he 
tried to defend himself, he would have only dragged himself down. His re¬ 
sponse was masterful: He announced that he was indeed the son of a shoe¬ 
maker, but this only proved his greatness, since he had risen from the 
lowest stratum of society to its very pinnacle. From then on he never men¬ 
tioned his previous lie, trumpeting instead his new position on the matter 
of his ancestry. 

Remember: The powerful responses to niggling, petty annoyances and 
irritations are contempt and disdain. Never show that something has af¬ 
fected you, or that you are offended—that only shows you have acknowl¬ 
edged a problem. Contempt is a dish that is best served cold and without 
affectation. 



Image: 
The Tiny 
Wound. 


It is small but painful and irritating. You 
try all sorts of medicaments, you com¬ 
plain, you scratch and pick at the scab. 
Doctors only make it worse, transforming 
the tiny wound into a grave matter. If only 
you had left the wound alone, letting time 
heal it and freeing yourself of worry. 


Authority: Know how to play the card of contempt. It is the most politic 
kind of revenge. For there are many of whom we should have known 
nothing if their distinguished opponents had taken no notice of them. 
There is no revenge like oblivion, for it is the entombment of the unwor¬ 
thy in the dust of their own nothingness. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658) 


REVERSAL 

You must play the card of contempt with care and delicacy. Most small 
troubles will vanish on their own if you leave them be; but some will grow 
and fester unless you attend to them. Ignore a person of inferior stature and 
the next time you look he has become a serious rival, and your contempt 
has made him vengeful as well. The great princes of Renaissance Italy 
chose to ignore Cesare Borgia at the outset of his career as a young general 
in the army of his father, Pope Alexander VL By the time they paid atten¬ 
tion it was too late—the cub was now a lion, gobbling up chunks of Italy. 
Often, then, while you show contempt publicly you will also need to keep 
an eye on the problem privately, monitoring its status and making sure it 
goes away. Do not let it become a cancerous cell. 

Develop the skill of sensing problems when they are still small and 
taking care of them before they become intractable. Learn to distinguish 
between the potentially disastrous and the mildly irritating, the nuisance 
that will quietly go away on its own. In either case, though, never com¬ 
pletely take your eye off it. As long as it is alive it can smolder and spark 
into life. 



LAW 


37 

CREATE COMPELLING 
SPECTACLES 


JUDGMENT 

Striking imagery and grand symbolic gestures create the 
aura of power-—everyone responds to them. Stage specta¬ 
cles for those around you, then, full of arresting visuals 
and radiant symbols that heighten your presence. Daz¬ 
zled by appearances, no one will notice what you are 
really doing. 



ANTONY ANI1 < 1 J'.Oi'YI'HA 

She relied above all 
upon her physical pres¬ 
ence and the spell and 
enchantment which it 
could create.... She 
came sailing up the 
river Cydnus in a barge 
with a poop of gold, its 
purple sails billowing 
in the wind, while her 
rowers caressed the 
water with oars of 
silver which dipped in 
time to the music of the 
flute, accompanied by 
pipes and lutes. 
Cleopatra herself 
reclined beneath a 
canopy of cloth of 
gold, dressed in the 
character of Aphrodite ; 
as we see her in paint¬ 
ings, while on either 
side to complete the 
picture stood hays 
costumed as Cupids 
who cooled her with 
their fans. Instead o f a 
crew the barge was 
lined with the most 
beautiful of her wait¬ 
ing-women attired as 
Nereids and Graces, 
some at the rudders , 
others at the tackle of 
the sails, and alt the 
white an indescribably 
rich perfume, exhaled 
from innumerable 
censers, k*£I5 wafted 
from the vessel to the 
riverbanks, Great 
multitudes accompa¬ 
nied this royal 
progress, same of them 
following the queen on 
both sides of the river 
from Us very mouth, 
while others hurried 
down from the. city of 
Tarsus to gaze at the 
sight. Gradually the 
crowds drifted away 
from the marketplace. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I 

In the early 1780s, word spread through Berlin of the strange and spectacu¬ 
lar medical practice of a Dr. Weisleder. He performed his miracles in an 
enormous converted beer hall, outside which Berliners began to notice 
ever longer lines of people-—the blind, the lame, anyone with an illness in¬ 
curable by normal medicine. When it leaked out that the doctor worked by 
exposing the patient to the rays of the moon, he soon became dubbed The 
Moon Doctor of Berlin. 

Sometime in 1783, it was reported that Dr. Weisleder had cured a well- 
to-do woman of a terrible ailment He suddenly became a celebrity. Previ¬ 
ously only the poorest Berliners had been seen waiting outside the beer 
hall in their rags; now magnificent carriages were parked outside, and gen¬ 
tlemen in frock coats, and ladies with enormous coiffures, lined the street 
as sunset drew near. Even folk with the mildest of ailments came, out of 
sheer curiosity. As they waited in line, the poorer clients would explain to 
the gentlemen and ladies that the doctor only practiced when the moon 
was in its increscent phase. Many would add that they themselves had al¬ 
ready been exposed to the healing powers he called forth from the rays of 
the moon. Even those who felt cured kept coming back, drawn by this 
powerful experience. 

Inside the beer hall, a strange and stirring spectacle greeted the visitor: 
Packed into the entrance hall was a crowd of all classes and ethnic back 
grounds, a veritable Tower of Babel. Through tall windows on the northern 
side of the hall, silvery moonlight poured in at odd angles. The doctor and 
his wife, who, it seemed, was also able to effect the cure, practiced on the 
second floor, which was reached by a stairway, at the end of the hall. As the 
line edged closer to the stairs, the sick would hear shouts and cries from 
above, and word would spread of, perhaps, a blind gentleman suddenly 
able to see. 

Once upstairs, the line would fork in two directions, toward a north¬ 
ern room for the doctor, a southern one for his wife, who worked only on 
the ladies. Finally, after hours of anticipation and waiting in line, the gen¬ 
tlemen patients would be led before the amazing doctor himself, an el¬ 
derly man with a few stalks of wild gray hair and an air of nervous energy. 
He would take the patient (let us say a young boy, brought in by his Fa¬ 
ther), uncover the afflicted body part, and lift the boy up to the window, 
which faced the light of the moon. He would rub the site of the injury or 
illness, mumble something unintelligible, look knowingly at the moon, 
and then, after collecting his fee, send the boy and his father on their way. 
Meanwhile, in the south-facing room, his wife would be doing the same 
with the ladies—which was odd, really, since the moon cannot appear in 
two places at once; it cannot have been visible, in other words, from both 
windows. Apparently the mere thought, idea, and symbol of the moon 
were enough, for the ladies did not complain, and would later remark 
confidently that the wife of the Moon Doctor had the same healing po wers 
as he. 


sro 


LAW 37 



Interpretation 

Dr, Weisleder may have known nothing about medicine, but he under¬ 
stood human nature. He recognized that people do not always want words, 
or rational explanations, or demonstrations of the powers of science; they 
want an immediate appeal to their emotions. Give them that and they will 
do the rest—such as imagine they can be healed by the light reflected from 
a rock a quarter million miles away. Dr. Weisleder had no need of pills, or 
of lengthy lectures on the moon’s power, or of any silly gadgetry to amplify 
its rays. He understood that the simpler the spectacle the better—just the 
moonlight pouring in from the side, the stairway leading to the heavens, 
and the rays of the moon, whether directly visible or not Any added ef¬ 
fects might have made it seem that the moon was not strong enough on its 
own. And the moon was strong enough—it was a magnet for fantasies, as it 
has been throughout history. Simply by associating himself with the image 
of the moon, the doctor gained power. 

Remember: Your search for power depends on shortcuts. You must al¬ 
ways circumvent people’s suspicions, their perverse desire to resist your 
will. Images are an extremely effective shortcut: Bypassing the head, the 
seat of doubt and resistance, they aim straight for the heart. Overwhelming 
the eyes, they create powerful associations, bringing people together and 
stirring their emotions. With the white light of the moon in their eyes, your 
targets are blinded to the deceptions you practice. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II 

In 1536 the future king Henri II of France took his first mistress, Diane de 
Poitiers. Diane was thirty-seven at the time, and was the widow of the 
grand seneschal of Normandy. Henri, meanwhile, was a sprightly lad of 
seventeen, who was just beginning to sow his wild oats. At first their union 
seemed merely platonic, with Henri showing an intensely spiritual devo¬ 
tion to Diane. But it soon became clear that he loved her in every way, pre¬ 
ferring her bed to that of his young wife, Catherine de’ Medicis. 

In 1547 King Francis died and Henri ascended to the throne. This new 
situation posed perils for Diane de Poitiers. She had just turned forty-eight, 
and despite her notorious cold baths and rumored youth potions, she was 
beginning to show her age; now that Henri was king, perhaps he would re¬ 
turn to the queen’s bed, and do as other kings had done—choose mis¬ 
tresses from the bevy of beauties who made the French court the envy of 
Europe. He was, after all, only twenty-eight, and cut a dashing figure. But 
Diane did not give up so easily. She would continue to enthrall her lover, 
as she had enthralled him for the past eleven years. 

Diane’s secret weapons were symbols and images, to which she had al¬ 
ways paid great attention. Early on in her relationship with Henri, she had 
created a motif by intertwining her initials with his, to symbolize their 
union. The idea worked like a chann: Henri put this insignia everywhere— 
on his royal robes, on monuments, on churches, on the facade of the 


where Antony awaited! 
the queen enthroned on 
his tribunal, until at last 
he was left sitting quite 
alone. And the word 
spread on every side 
that Aphrodite had 
come to revel with 
Dionysus for the 
happiness of Asia. 
Antony then sent a 
message inviting 
Cleopatra to dine with 
him. But she thought it 
more appropriate that 
he should come to her, 
and so. as he wished to 
show his courtesy and 
goodwill, he accepted 
and went. He found the 
preparations made to 
receive him magnificent 
beyond words, but 
what astonished him 
most of all was the 
extraordinary number 
of lights. So many of 
these, it is said, were, let 
down from the roof 
and displayed on all 
sides at once, and they 
were arranged and 
grouped in such inge¬ 
nious patterns in rela¬ 
tion to each other, some 
in squares and some in 
circles, that they created 
as brilliant a spectacle 
as can ever have been 
devised to delight 
the eye. 

LIFE OF ANTONY. 

Plutarch. 
c. a.d. 46-120 


In the Middle Ages the 
symbolist attitude was 
much more in evidence. 
... Symbolism appears 
as a sort of short cut of 
thought. Instead of 
looking for the relation 


LAW 37 


311 



between two things by 
following the hidden 
detours of their causal 
connexions, thought 
makes a leap and 
discovers their relation 
not in the connexion 
of cause and effects, 
but in a connexion of 
signification.... 
Symbolist thought 
permits an infinity of 
relations between 
tilings. Each thing may 
denote a number of 
distinct ideas by its 
different special quali¬ 
ties, and a quality may- 
have several symbolic 
meanings. The highest 
conceptions have 
symbols by the thou¬ 
sand. Nothing is too 
humble to represent 
and glory the sublime. 

The walnut signifies 
Christ: the sweet kernel 
is His divine nature, the 
green and pulpy outer 
peel is His humanity, 
the wooden shell 
between is the cross. 
Thus all things raise 
his thoughts to the 
eternal .... Every 
precious stone, besides 
its natural splendour 
sparkles with the bril¬ 
liance of its symbolic 
values. The assimilation 
of roses and virginity is 
much more than a 
poetic comparison, for 
it reveals their common 
essence. As each notion 
arises in the mind the 
logic of symbolism 
creates an harmony 
of ideas. 

THE WANING OF THE 
MIDDLE AGES, 

Johan Huizinga, 
1928 


Louvre, then the royal palace in Paris. Diane’s favorite colors were black 
and white, which she wore exclusively, and wherever it was possible the in¬ 
signia appeared in these colors. Everyone recognized the symbol and its 
meaning. Soon after Henri took the throne, however, Diane went still fur¬ 
ther; She decided to identify herself with the Roman goddess Diana, her 
namesake. Diana was the goddess of the hunt, the traditional royal pastime 
and the particular passion of Henri. Equally important, in Renaissance art 
she symbolized chastity and purity. For a woman like Diane to identify her¬ 
self with this goddess would instantly call up those images in the court, giv¬ 
ing her an air of respectability. Symbolizing her “chaste” relationship with 
Henri, it would also set her apart from the adulterous liaisons of royal mis¬ 
tresses past. 

To effect this association, Diane began by completely transforming her 
castle at Anet. She razed the building’s structure and in its place erected a 
magnificent Doric-columned edifice modeled after a Roman temple. It was 
made in white Normandy stone flecked with black silex, reproducing 
Diane’s trademark colors of black and white. The insignia of her and 
Henri’s initials appeared on the columns, the doors, the windows, the car¬ 
pet. Meanwhile, symbols of Diana—crescent moons, stags, and hounds— 
adorned the gates and facade. Inside, enormous tapestries depicting 
episodes in the life of the goddess lay on the floors and hung on the walls. 
In the garden stood the famous Goujon sculpture Diane Chasseresse, which is 
now in the Louvre, and which had an uncanny resemblance to Diane de 
Poitiers. Paintings and other depictions of Diana appeared in every comer 
of the castle. 

Anet overwhelmed Henri, who soon was trumpeting the image of 
Diane de Poitiers as a Roman goddess. In 1548, when the couple appeared 
together in Lyons for a royal celebration, the townspeople welcomed them 
with a tableau vivant depicting a scene with Diana the huntress. France’s 
greatest poet of the period, Pierre de Ronsard, began to write verses in 
honor of Diana—indeed a kind of cult of Diana sprang up, all inspired by 
the king’s mistress. It seemed to Henri that Diane had given herself a kind 
of divine aura, and as if he were destined to worship her for the rest of his 
life. And until his death, in 1559, he did remain faithful to her—making her 
a duchess, giving her untold wealth, and displaying an almost religious de¬ 
votion to his first and only mistress. 

Interpretation 

Diane de Poitiers, a woman from a modest bourgeois background, man¬ 
aged to captivate Henri for over twenty years. By the time he died she was 
well into her sixties, yet his passion for her only increased with the years. 
She knew the king well. He was not an intellectual but a lover of the out¬ 
doors—he particularly loved jousting tournaments, with their bright pen¬ 
nants, brilliantly caparisoned horses, and beautifully dressed women. 
Henri’s love of visual splendor seemed childlike to Diane, and she played 
on ibis weakness of his at every opportunity. 


312 


LAW 37 




Most astute of all was Diane’s appropriation of the goddess Diana. 
Here she took the game beyond physical imagery into the realm of the psy¬ 
chic symbol. It was quite a feat to transform a king’s mistress into an em- 
blem of power and purity, but she managed it Without the resonance of 
the goddess, Diane was merely an aging courtesan. With the imager)' and 
symbolism of Diana on her shoulders, she seemed a mythic force, destined 
for greatness. 

You too can play with images like these, weaving visual clues into an 
encompassing gestalt, as Diane did with her colors and her insignia. Estab¬ 
lish a trademark like these to set yourself apart. Then take the game fur¬ 
ther: Find an image or symbol from the past that will neatly fit your 
situation, and put it on your shoulders like a cape. It will make you seem 
larger than life. 

Became of the light it shines on the other stars which make up a kind of 
court around it, because of the just and equal distribution of its rays to 
all alike, because of the good it brings to all places, producing life, joy 
and action, because of its constancy from which it never varies, ! chose 
the sun as the most magnificent image to represent a great leader 
Louis XIV, the Sun King, 1638-1 715 


KEYS TO POWER 

Using words to plead your case is risky business: Words are dangerous in¬ 
struments, and often go astray. The words people use to persuade us virtu¬ 
ally invite us to reflect on them with words of our own; we mull them over, 
and often end up believing the opposite of what they say. (That is part of 
our perverse nature.) It also happens that words offend us, stirring up asso¬ 
ciations unintended by the speaker. 

The visual, on the other hand, short-circuits the labyrinth of words. It 
strikes with an emotional power and immediacy that leave no gaps for re¬ 
flection and doubt. Like music, it leaps right over rational, reasonable 
thoughts. Imagine the Moon Doctor trying to make a case for his medical 
practice, trying to convince the unconverted by telling them about the 
healing powers of the moon, and about his own special connection to a dis¬ 
tant object in the sky. Fortunately for him, he was able to create a com¬ 
pelling spectacle that made words unnecessary. The moment his patients 
entered the beer hall, the image of the moon spoke eloquently enough. 

Understand: Words put you on the defensive. If you have to explain 
yourself your power is already in question. The image, on the other hand, 
imposes itself as a given. It discourages questions, creates forceful associa¬ 
tions, resists unintended interpretations, communicates instantly, and 
forges bonds that transcend social differences. Words stir up arguments 
and divisions; images bring people together. They are the quintessential in¬ 
struments of power. 

The symbol has the same force, whether it is visual (the statue of 


There was a man 
named Sakamotoya 
Hechigwan who lived 
in upper Kyoto.... 
When fEmperorj 
Hideyoshi gave his 
great Cha-no-yu {tea 
ceremony] meeting at 
Kitano in the tenth 
month of 1588, Hechig¬ 
wan set up a great red 
umbrella nine feet 
across mounted on a 
slick seven feet high. 
The circumference of 
the handle he. 
surrounded for about 
two feet by a reed fence 
in such a way that the 
rays of the sun were 
reflected from it and 
diffused the colour of 
the umbrella all 
around. This device 
pleased Hideyoshi so 
much that he remitted 
Hechigwan’s taxes as a 
reward. 

CHA-NO-YU: 

THE JAPANESE TEA 
CEREMONY, 

A. L. Sadler, 

1962 


LAW 37 313 



Diana) or a verbal description of something visual (the words “the Sun 
King”). The symbolic object stands for something else, something abstract 
(such as the image “Diana” standing for chastity). The abstract concept— 
purity, patriotism, courage, love—is full of emotional and powerful associa¬ 
tions, The symbol is a shortcut of expression, containing dozens of 
meanings in one simple phrase or object. The symbol of the Sun King, as 
explained by Louis XIV, can be read on many layers, but the beauty of it is 
that its associations required no explanation, spoke immediately to his sub¬ 
jects, distinguished him from all other kings, and conjured up a kind of 
majesty that went far beyond the words themselves. The symbol contains 
untold power. 

The first step in using symbols and images is to understand the pri¬ 
macy of sight among the senses. Before the Renaissance, it has been ar¬ 
gued, sight and the other senses—taste, touch, and so on—operated on a 
relatively equal plane. Since then, however, the visual has come to domi¬ 
nate the others, and is the sense we most depend on and trust. As Gracian 
said, “The truth is generally seen, rarely heard.” When the Renaissance 
painter Fra Filippo Lippi was a captured slave among the Moors, he won 
his freedom by sketching a drawing of his master on a white wall with a 
piece of charcoal; when the owner saw the drawing, he instantly under¬ 
stood the power of a man who could make such images, and let Fra Lippi 
go. That one image was far more powerful than any argument the artist 
could have made with words. 

Never neglect the way you arrange things visually. Factors like color, 
for example, have enormous symbolic resonance. When the con artist Yel¬ 
low Kid Weil created a newsletter touting the phony stocks he was ped¬ 
dling, he called it the “Red Letter Newsletter” and had it printed, at 
considerable expense, in red ink. The color created a sense of urgency, 
power, and good fortune. Weil recognized details like these as keys to de¬ 
ception—as do modem advertisers and mass-marketers. If you use “gold” 
in the title of anything you are trying to sell, for example, print it in gold. 
Since the eye predominates, people will respond more to the color than to 
the word. 

The visual contains great emotional power. The Roman emperor Con¬ 
stantine worshipped the sun as a god for most of Ms life; one day, though, 
he looked up at the sun, and saw a cross superimposed on it. The vision of 
the cross over the sun proved to him the ascendancy of the new religion, 
and he converted not just himself but the whole Roman Empire to Chris¬ 
tianity soon thereafter. All the preaching and proselytizing in the world 
could not have been as powerful. Find and associate yourself with the im¬ 
ages and symbols that will communicate in this immediate way today, and 
you will have untold power. 

Most effective of all is anew combination—a fusion of images and sym¬ 
bols that have not been seen together before, but that through their associ¬ 
ation clearly demonstrate your new idea, message, religion. The creation of 
new images and symbols out of old ones in this way has a poetic effect- 
viewers’ associations run rampant, giving them a sense of participation. 


314 


LAW 37 



Visual images often appear in a sequence, and the order in which they 
appear creates a symbol. The first to appear, for instance, symbolizes 
power; the image at the center seems to have central importance. 

Near the end of World War II, orders came down from General Eisen¬ 
hower that American troops were to lead the way into Paris after its liber¬ 
ation from the Nazis. The French general Charles de Gaulle, however, 
realized that this sequence would imply that the Americans now com¬ 
manded the fate of France. Through much manipulation, de Gaulle made 
certain that he and the French Second Armored Division would appear at 
the head of the liberating force. The strategy worked: After he had success- 
fully pulled off this stunt, the Allies started treating him as the new leader 
of an independent France. De Gaulle knew that a leader has to locate him 
self literally at the head of his troops. This visual association is crucial to the 
emotional response that he needs to elicit. 

Things change in the game of symbols: It is probably no longer possi¬ 
ble to pose as a “sun king,* or to wrap the mantle of Diana around you. Yet 
you can associate yourself with such symbols more indirectly. And, of 
course, you can make your own mythology out of figures from more re¬ 
cent history, people who are comfortably dead but still powerfully associa¬ 
tive in the public eye. The idea is to give yourself an aura, a stature that 
your normal banal appearance simply will not create. By herself Diane de 
Poitiers had no such radiant powers; she was as human and ordinary as 
most of us. But the symbol elevated her above the human lot, and made 
her seem divine. 

Using symbols also has a courtier-like effect, since they are often gen¬ 
tler than brutish words. The psychotherapist Dr. Milton H. Erickson al¬ 
ways tried to find symbols and images that would communicate to the 
patient in ways that words could not. When dealing with a severely trou¬ 
bled patient, he would not question him directly but would talk about 
something irrelevant, such as driving through the desert in Arizona, where 
he practiced in the 1950s. In describing this he would eventually come to 
mi appropriate symbol for what he suspected was the man’s problem. If he 
felt the patient was isolated, say. Dr. Erickson would talk of a single iron- 
wood tree, and how its isolation left it battered by the winds. Making an 
emotional connection with the tree as a symbol, the patient would open up 
more readily to the doctor’s probing. 

Use the power of symbols as a way to rally, animate, and unite your 
troops or team. During the rebellion against the French crown in 1648, 
those loyal to the king disparaged the rebels by comparing them to the 
slingshots (in French, jrondes) that little boys use to frighten big boys. Cardi¬ 
nal de Retz decided to turn this disparaging term into the rebels’ symbol: 
The uprising was now known as the Fronde , and the rebels as firondeurs. 
They began to wear sashes in their hats that symbolized the slingshot, and 
the word became their rallying cry. Without it the rebellion might well 
have petered out Always find a symbol to represent your cause—the more 
emotional associations, the better. 

The best way to use images and symbols is to organize them into a 



grand spectacle that awes people and distracts them from unpleasant reali¬ 
ties, This is easy to do: People love what is grand, spectacular, and larger 
than life. Appeal to their emotions and they will flock to your spectacle in 
hordes. The visual is the easiest route to their hearts. 


Image: 

The Cross and the 
Sun. Crucifixion and 
total radiance. With one 
imposed over the other, a 
new reality takes shape— 
a new' power is in the 
ascendant. The sym¬ 
bol—no explanation 
necessary. 


Authority: The people are 
always impressed by the 
superficial appearance of 
things.... The [prince] should, 
at fitting times of the year, 
keep the people occupied 
and distracted with festivities 
and spectacles. (Niccolo 
Machiavelti, 1469-1527) 


REVERSAL 

No power is made available by ignoring images and symbols. There is no 
possible reversal to this law. 




LAW 



THINK AS YOU LIKE 
BUT BEHAVE LIKE 
OTHERS 


JUDGMENT 

If you make a show of going against the times, flaunting 
your unconventional ideas and unorthodox ways, people 
will think that you only want attention and that you 
look down upon them. They will find a way to punish 
you for making them feel inferior. It is far safer to blend 
in and nurture the common touch. Share your original 
ity only with tolerant friends and those who are sure to 
appreciate your uniqueness. 



i lusk w rrn i hi. i-T.vc 
AM) Sl’KAk WITH 

IIII. MANY 

It is easy to run into 
danger by trying to 
swim against the 
stream. Only a Socrates 
could attempt to do 
that. Disagreement is 
regarded as offensive 
because it is a condem¬ 
nation of the views of 
others; the numbers of 
the disgruntled grow, 
on account either of 
some matter that has 
been the object of 
censure or of some 
person who has praised 
it: Truth is for the few, 
error is as usual as it is 
vulgar. Nor is the wise 
man to be recognized 
by what he says in the 
marketplace, for he 
speaks there not with 
his own voice, but with 
that of uni versat folly, 
however much his 
inmost thoughts may 
gainsay it: The wise 
man avoids being 
contradicted as sedu¬ 
lously as he avoids 
contradicting; the 
publicity of censure is 
withheld from that 
which readily provokes 
it. Thought is free: it 
can noi and should not 
be coerced; retire into 
the sanctuary of your 
silence and if you 
sometimes allow your¬ 
self to break it, do so 
under the aegis of a 
discreet few. 

Baltasar Oraoan. 

1601.1658 


31S 


TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

Around the year 478 B.c., the city of Sparta sent an expedition to Persia led 
by the young Spartan nobleman Pausanias. The city-states of Greece had 
recently fought off a mighty invasion from Persia, and now Pausanias, 
along with allied ships from Athens, had orders to punish the invaders and 
win bach the islands and coastal towns that the Persians had occupied. 
Both the Athenians and the Spartans had great respect for Pausanias—-he 
had proven himself as a fearless warrior, with a flair for the dramatic. 

With amazing speed, Pausanias and his troops took Cyprus, then 
moved on to the mainland of Asia Minor known as the Hellespont and 
captured Byzantium (modem-day Istanbul). Now master of part of the Per¬ 
sian empire, Pausanias began to show signs of behavior that went beyond 
his normal flamboyance. He appeared in public wearing pomades in his 
hair and flowing Persian robes, and accompanied by a bodyguard of Egyp¬ 
tians. He held lavish banquets in which he sat in the Persian manner and 
demanded to be entertained. He stopped seeing his old friends, entered 
into communication with the Persian King Xerxes, and all in all affected 
the style and manner of a Persian dictator. 

Clearly power and success had gone to Pausanias’s head. His army— 
Athenians and Spartans alike—at first thought this a passing fancy: He had 
always been a bit exaggerated in his gestures. But when he flaunted his dis¬ 
dain for the Greeks' simple way of life, and insulted the common Greek 
soldier, they began to feel he had gone too far. Although there was no con¬ 
crete evidence for this, rumors spread that he had gone over to the other 
side, and that he dreamed of becoming a kind of Greek Xerxes. To quell 
the possibility of mutiny, the Spartans relieved Pausanias of his command 
and called him home. 

Pausanias, however, continued to dress in the Persian style, even in 
Sparta. After a few months he independently hired a trireme and returned 
to the Hellespont, telling his compatriots he was going to continue the fight 
against the Persians. Actually, however, he had different plans—to make 
himself ruler of all Greece, with the aid of Xerxes himself. The Spartans 
declared him a public enemy and sent a ship to capture him, Pausanias sur¬ 
rendered, certain that he could clear himself of the charges of treason. It 
did come out during the trial that during his reign as commander he had 
offended his fellow Greeks time and again, erecting monuments, for in¬ 
stance, in his own name, rather than in those of the cities whose troops had 
fought alongside him, as was die custom. Yet Pausanias proved right: De¬ 
spite the evidence of his numerous contacts with the enemy, the Spartans 
refused to imprison a man of such noble birth, and let him go. 

Now thinking himself untouchable, Pausanias hired a messenger to 
take a letter to Xerxes, but the messenger instead took the letter to the 
Spartan authorities. These men wanted to find out more, so they had the 
messenger arrange to meet Pausanias in a temple where they could hide 
and listen behind a partition. What Pausanias said shocked them—they 
had never heard such contempt for their ways spoken so brazenly by one 
of their own—and they made arrangements for his immediate arrest. 


LAW 38 



On his way home from the temple, Pausanias got word of what had 
happened. He ran to another temple to hide, but the authorities followed 
him there and placed sentries all around. Pausanias refused to surrender. 
Unwilling to forcibly remove him from the sacred temple, the authorities 
kept him trapped inside, until he eventually died of starvation. 

Interpretation 

At first glance it might seem that Pausanias simply fell in love with another 
culture, a phenomenon as old as time. Never comfortable with the asceti¬ 
cism of the Spartans, he found himself enthralled by the Persian love of 
luxury and sensual pleasure. He put on Persian robes and perfumes with a 
sense of deliverance from Greek discipline and simplicity. 

This is how it appears when people adopt a culture in which they were 
not raised. Often, however, there is also something else at play: People 
who flaunt their infatuation with a different culture are expressing a dis¬ 
dain and contempt for their own. They are using the outward appearance 
of the exotic to separate themselves from the common folk who unques- 
tioningly follow the local customs and laws, and to express their sense of 
superiority. Otherwise they would act with more dignity, showing respect 
for those who do not share their desires. Indeed their need to show their 
difference so dramatically often makes them disliked by the people whose 
beliefs they challenge, indirectly and subtly, perhaps, but offensively 
nonetheless. 

As Thucydides wrote of Pausanias, “By his contempt for the laws and 
his imitation of foreign ways he had made himself very widely suspected of 
being unwilling to abide by normal standards.” Cultures have norms that 
reflect centuries of shared beliefs and ideals. Do not expect to scoff at such 
things with impunity. You will be punished somehow, even if just through 
isolation—a position of real powerlessness. 

Many of us, like Pausanias, feel the siren call of the exotic, the foreign. 
Measure and moderate this desire. Flaunting your pleasure in alien ways of 
thinking and acting will reveal a different motive—to demonstrate your su¬ 
periority over your fellows. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

During the late sixteenth century, a violent reaction against the JYotestant 
Reformation erupted in Italy. The Counter-Reformation, as it was called, 
included its own version of the Inquisition to root out all deviations from 
the Catholic Church. Among its victims was the scientist Galileo, but an 
important thinker who suffered even greater persecution was the Domini¬ 
can monk and philosopher Tommaso Campanetla. 

A follower of the materialist doctrine of the Roman philosopher Epi¬ 
curus, Campanella did not believe in miracles, or in heaven and hell. The 
Church had promoted such superstitions, he wrote, to control the common 
folk by keeping them in fear. Such ideas verged on atheism, and Cam¬ 
panella expressed them incautiously. In 1593 the Inquisition threw him 


Bene vixit, qui bene 
latuit— “He lives well 
who conceals himself 
well. ” 

Ovid, 

c. 43 b.c.-a.d, 18 


Wise men (should be] 
like coffers with double 
bottoms: Which when 
others look into , being 
opened, they see not all 
that they hold. 

Sir Walter Raleigh, 
1554-1618 


WIIKJM Tin: Vl'ATKKS 
WERE dHANCI'll) 

Once upon a time 
Khidr, the teacher of 
Moses, called upon 
mankind with a warn¬ 
ing. A t a certain date, 
he said, all the water in 
the world which had 
not been specially 
hoarded, would disap¬ 
pear. ft would then be 
renewed, with different 
water, which would 
drive men mad. 

Only one man listened 
to the meaning of this 
advice. He collected 
water and went to a 
secure place where he 
stored it, and waited for 
the water to change its 
character. 

On the appointed date 
the streams stopped 
running, the wells went 
dry, and the man who 
had listened, seeing this 


LAW 38 


319 




happening, went to his 
retreat and drank his 
preserved water. 
When he saw, from his 
security, the waterfalls 
again beginning to 
flow, this man 
descended among the 
other sons of men. He 
found that they were 
thinking and talking in 
an entirely different 
way from before: yet 
they had no memory of 
what had happened, 
nor of having been 
warned. When he tried 
to talk to them , he real¬ 
ized that they thought 
that he was mad, and 
they showed hostility or 
compassion, not under¬ 
standing . 
At first he drank none 
of the new water, hut 
went back to his 
concealment, to draw 
on his supplies, every 
day. Finally , however, 
he took the decision to 
drink the new water 
because he could not 
bear the loneliness of 
living, behaving and 
thinking in a different 
way from everyone 
else. He drank the new 
water, and became like 
the rest. Then he forgot 
all about his own store 
of special water, and 
his fellows began to 
took upon him as a 
madman who had 
miraculously been 
restored to sanity. 

TALES OF 
THE DERVISHES, 
Idries Shah, 
1967 


into prison for his heretical beliefs. Six years later, as a form of partial re¬ 
lease, he was confined to a monastery in Naples. 

Southern Italy was controlled by Spain at the time, and in Naples 
Campanella became involved in a plot to fight and throw out these in¬ 
vaders. His hope was to establish an independent republic based on his 
own ideas of utopia. The leaders of the Italian Inquisition, working with 
their Spanish counterparts, had him imprisoned again. This time they also 
tortured him, to discover the true nature of his impious beliefs : He was sub¬ 
jected to the infamous la veglia, a torture in which he was suspended by his 
arms in a squatting position a few inches above a seat studded with spikes. 
The posture was impossible to sustain, and in time the victim would end up 
sitting on the spikes, which would tear his flesh at the slightest contact. 

During these years, however, Campanella learned something about 
power. Facing the prospect of execution for heresy, he changed his strat¬ 
egy: He would not renounce his beliefs, yet he knew he had to disguise 
their outward appearance. 

To save his life, Campanella feigned madness. He let his inquisitors 
imagine that his beliefs stemmed from an incontrollable unsoundness of 
mind. For a while the tortures continued, to see if his insanity was faked, 
but in 1603 his sentence was commuted to life in prison. The first four 
years of this he spent chained to a wall in an underground dungeon. De¬ 
spite such conditions, he continued to write—although no longer would he 
be so foolish as to express his ideas directly. 

One book of Campanella’s, The Hispanic Monarchy , promoted the idea 
that Spain had a divine mission to expand its powers around the world, 
and offered the Spanish king practical, Machiavelli-type advice for achiev¬ 
ing this. Despite his own interest in Machiavelli, the book in general pre¬ 
sented ideas completely the opposite to his own. The Hispanic Monarchy was 
in fact a ploy, an attempt to show his conversion to orthodoxy in the bold¬ 
est manner possible. It worked: In 1626, six years after its publication, the 
pope finally let Campanella out of prison. 

Shortly after gaining his freedom, Campanella wrote Atheism Con¬ 
quered, a book attacking free-thinkers, Machiavellians, Calvinists, and 
heretics of all stripes. The book is written in the form of debates in which 
heretics express their beliefs and are countered by arguments for the supe¬ 
riority of Catholicism. Campanella had obviously reformed—his book 
made that clear. Or did it? 

The arguments in the mouths of the heretics had never before been 
expressed with such verve and freshness. Pretending to present their side 
only to knock it down, Campanella actually summarized the case against 
Catholicism with striking passion. When he argued the other side, suppos¬ 
edly his side, on the other hand, he resorted to stale cliches and convoluted 
rationales. Brief and eloquent, the heretics 1 arguments seemed bold and 
sincere. The lengthy arguments for Catholicism seemed tiresome and un¬ 
convincing. 

Catholics who read the book found it disturbing and ambiguous, but 


320 LAW 38 



they could not claim it was heretical, or that Campanelia should he re¬ 
turned to prison. His defense of Catholicism, after all, used arguments they 
had used themselves. Yet in the years to come. Atheism Conquered became a 
bible for atheists, Machiavellians and libertines who used the arguments 
Campanelia had put in their mouths to defend their dangerous ideas. Com¬ 
bining an outward display of conformity with an expression of his true be¬ 
liefs in a way that his sympathizers would understand, Campanelia showed 
that he had learned his lesson. 

Interpretation 

In the face of awesome persecution, Campanelia devised three strate¬ 
gic moves that saved his hide, freed him from prison, and allowed him to 
continue to express his beliefs. First he feigned madness—the medieval 
equivalent of disavowing responsibility for one’s actions, like blaming 
one’s parents today. Next lie wrote a book that expressed the exact oppo¬ 
site of his own beliefs. Finally, and most brilliantly of all, he disguised his 
ideas while insinuating them at the same time. It is an old but powerful 
trick: You pretend to disagree with dangerous ideas, but in the course of 
your disagreement you give those ideas expression and exposure. You 
seem to conform to the prevailing orthodoxy, but those who know will un¬ 
derstand the irony involved. You are protected. 

It is inevitable in society that certain values and customs lose contact 
with their original motives and become oppressive. And there will always 
be those who rebel against such oppression, harboring ideas far ahead of 
their time. As Campanelia was forced to realize, however, there is no point 
in making a display of your dangerous ideas if they only bring you suffer¬ 
ing and persecution. Martyrdom serves no purpose—better to live on in an 
oppressive world, even to thrive in it Meanwhile find a way to express 
your ideas subtly for those who understand you. Laying your pearls before 
swine will only bring you trouble. 

For a long time / have not said what / believed, nor do / ever believe 
what I say, and if indeed sometimes I do happen to tell the truth, 

I hide it among so many lies that it is hard to find. 

Niccolb Mackiavdli, in a letter to Francesco Guicciardini, May 17, 1521 


Never combat any 
man '$ opinion; for 
(hough you reached the 
age of Methuselah, you 
would never have done 
setting him right upon 
all the absurd things 
that he believes, 
ft is also well to avoid 
correcting people 's 
mistakes in conversa¬ 
tion, however good 
your intentions may be; 
for it is easy to offend 
people, and difficult, if 
not impossible to mend 
them. 

If you feel irritated by 
the absurd remarks of 
two people whose 
conversation you 
happen to overhear, 
you should imagine 
that you are listening to 
the dialogue of two 
fools in a comedy. 
Probatum est. 

The man who comes 
into the world with the 
notion that he is really 
going to instruct it in 
matters of the highest 
importance, may thank 
his stars if he escapes 
with a whole skin. 

Arthur 

Schopenhauer, 

1788 - 1£60 


KEYS TO POWER 

We all tell lies and hide our true feelings, for complete free expression is a 
social impossibility. From an early age we learn to conceal our thoughts, 
telling the prickly and insecure what we know they want to hear, watching 
carefully lest we offend them. For most of us this is natural—there are ideas 
and values that most people accept, and it is pointless to argue. We believe 
what we want to, then, but on the outside we wear a mask. 

There are people, however, who see such restraints as an intolerable 
infringement on their freedom, and who have a need to prove the superi- 


LAW 38 321 




THE UTIZKN ANn 
TIIK TILWI.U.I.H 

“Look around you," 
said the citizen. “This is 
the largest market in 
the world." 
“Oh surely not, r said 
the traveller. 
“Well, perhaps not 
(he largest, ” said the 
citizen, “hat much 
the best. ” 
“You are certainly 
wrong there ," said the 
traveller. "I can tell 
you —" 
They buried the 
stranger in the dusk. 

FABLES, 

Robert Lou is 
Stevenson. 1850-1894 


If Machiavelli had had 
a prince for disciple, 
the first thing he would 
have recommended 
him to do would have 
been to write a book 
against Machia vellism. 

Voltaire, 
16941778 


ority of their values and beliefs. In the end, though, their arguments con¬ 
vince only a few and offend a great deal more. The reason arguments do 
not work is that most people hold their ideas and values without thinking 
about them. There is a strong emotional content in their beliefs: They re¬ 
ally do not want to have to rework their habits of thinking, and when you 
challenge them, whether directly through your arguments or indirectly 
through your behavior, they are hostile. 

Wise and clever people learn early on that they can display conven¬ 
tional behavior and mouth conventional ideas without having to believe in 
them. The power these people gain from blending in is that of being left 
alone to have the thoughts they want to have, and to express them to the 
people they want to express them to, without suffering isolation or os¬ 
tracism, Once they have established themselves in a position of power, 
they can try to convince a wider circle of the correctness of their ideas— 
perhaps working indirectly, using Campanella’s strategies of irony and in¬ 
sinuation. 

In the late fourteenth century, the Spanish began a massive persecu¬ 
tion of the Jews, murdering thousands and driving others out of the coun¬ 
try. Those who remained in Spain were forced to convert. Yet over the next 
three hundred years, the Spanish noticed a phenomenon that disturbed 
them: Many of the converts lived their outward lives as Catholics, yet 
somehow managed to retain their Jewish beliefs, practicing the religion in 
private. Many of these so-called Marranos (originally a derogatory term, 
being the Spanish for “pig”) attained high levels of government office, mar¬ 
ried into the nobility, and gave every appearance of Christian piety, only 
to be discovered late in life as practicing Jews. (The Spanish Inquisition 
was specifically commissioned to ferret them out.) Over the years they 
mastered the art of dissimulation, displaying crucifixes liberally, giving 
generous gifts to churches, even occasionally making anti-Semitic 
remarks—and all the while maintaining their inner freedom and beliefs. 

In society, the Marranos knew, outward appearances are what matter. 
This remains true today. The strategy is simple: As Campanella did in writ¬ 
ing Atheism Conquered, make a show of blending in, even going so far as to 
be the most zealous advocate of the prevailing orthodoxy. If you stick to 
conventional appearances in public few will believe you think differently 
in private. 

Do not be so foolish as to imagine that in our own time the old ortho¬ 
doxies are gone. Jonas Salk, for instance, thought science had gotten past 
politics and protocol. And so, in his search for a polio vaccine, he broke all 
the rules—going public with a discovery before showing it to the scientific 
community, taking credit for the vaccine without acknowledging the scien¬ 
tists who had paved the way, making himself a star. The public may have 
loved him but scientists shunned him. His disrespect for his community’s 
orthodoxies left him isolated, and he wasted years trying to heal the 
breach, and struggling for funding and cooperation. 

Bertolt Brecht underwent a modem form of Inquisition—the House 


322 


LAW 38 



Un American Activities Committee—and approached it with considerable 
canniness. Having worked off and on in the American film industry during 
World War II, in 1947 Brecht was summoned to appear before the commit¬ 
tee to answer questions on his suspected Communist sympathies. Other 
writers called before the committee made a point of attacking its members, 
and of acting as belligerently as possible in order to gain sympathy for 
themselves. Brecht, on the other hand, who had actually worked stead¬ 
fastly for the Communist cause, played the opposite game: He answered 
questions with ambiguous generalities that defied easy interpretation. Call 
it the Campanella strategy. Brecht even wore a suit—a rare event for him— 
and made a point of smoking a cigar during the proceedings, knowing that 
a key committee member had a passion for cigars. In the end he charmed 
the committee members, who let him go scot-free. 

Brecht then moved to East Germany, where he encountered a differ¬ 
ent kind of Inquisition. Here the Communists were in power, and they crit¬ 
icized his plays as decadent and pessimistic. He did not argue with them, 
but made small changes in the performance scripts to shut them up. Mean¬ 
while he managed to preserve the published texts as written. His outward 
conformity in both cases gave him the freedom to work unhindered, with¬ 
out having to change his thinking. In the end, he made his way safely 
through dangerous times in different countries through the use of little 
dances of orthodoxy, and proved he was more powerful than the forces of 
repression. 

Not only do people of power avoid the offenses of Fausanias and Salk, 
they also learn to play the clever fox and feign the common touch. This has 
been the ploy of con artists and politicians throughout the centuries. Lead¬ 
ers like Julius Caesar and Franklin D. Roosevelt have overcome their nat¬ 
ural aristocratic stance to cultivate a familiarity with the common man. 
They have expressed this familiarity in little gestures, often symbolic, to 
show the people that their leaders share popular values, despite their differ¬ 
ent status. 

The logical extension of this practice is the invaluable ability to be all 
things to all people. When you go into society, leave behind your own 
ideas and values, and put on the mask that is most appropriate for the 
group in which you find yourself. Bismarck played this game successfully 
for years—-there were people who vaguely understood what he was up to, 
but not clearly enough that it mattered. People will swallow the bait be¬ 
cause it flatters them to believe that you share their ideas. They will not 
take you as a hypocrite if you are careful—for how can they accuse you of 
hypocrisy if you do not let them know exactly what you stand for? Nor will 
they see you as lacking in values. Of course you have values—the values 
you share with them, while in their company. 

Authority: Do not give dogs what is holy; and do not throw 
your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under 
foot and turn to attack you. (Jesus Christ, Matthew 7:6) 


CAW 38 : 323 



Image: 

The Black herd shuns the 

Sheep black sheep uncertain 
whether or not it belongs 
with them. So it straggles be¬ 
hind, or wanders away from 
the herd, where it is cornered 
by wolves and promptly de¬ 
voured. Stay with the herd— 
there is safety in numbers. Keep 
your differences in your 
thoughts and not in your fleece. 


REVERSAL 

The only time it is worth standing out is when you already stand out— 
when you have achieved an unshakable position of power, and can display 
your difference from others as a sign of the distance between you. As pres¬ 
ident of the United States, Lyndon Johnson would sometimes hold meet¬ 
ings while he sat on the toilet. Since no one else either could or would 
claim such a “privilege,” Johnson was showing people that he did not have 
to observe the protocols and niceties of others. The Roman emperor 
Caligula played the same game: He would wear a woman’s negligee, or a 
bathrobe, to receive important visitors. He even went so far as to have his 
horse elected consul. But it backfired, for the people hated Caligula, and 
his gestures eventually brought his overthrow. The truth is that even those 
who attain the heights of power would be better off at least affecting the 
common touch, for at some point they may need popular support. 

Finally, there is always a place for the gadfly, the person who success¬ 
fully defies custom and mocks what has grown lifeless in a culture. Oscar 
Wilde, for example, achieved considerable social power on this founda¬ 
tion: He made it clear that he disdained the usual ways of doing things, and 
when he gave public readings his audiences not only expected him to in¬ 
sult them but welcomed it We notice, however, that his eccentric role 
eventually destroyed him. Even had he come to a better end, remember 
that he possessed an unusual genius: Without his gift to amuse and delight, 
his barbs would simply have offended people. 



LAW 


39 

STIR UP WATERS 
TO CATCH FISH 

JUDGMENT 

Anger and emotion are strategically counterproductive . 
You must always stay calm and objective . But if you can 
make your enemies angry while staying calm yourself 
you gain a decided advantage. Put your enemies off bal¬ 
ance: Find the chink in their vanity through which you 
can rattle them and you hold the strings . 



ITAKl HA SI IK,I■ Ml. \l. 
(JHl.NIW ills OWN IK A 

The Kyoto Shoshidai 
Itakura Suwo-no-kami 
Singe mime was very 
fond of Cha-no-yu 
(the tea ceremony), and 
used to grind his own 
tea while sitting in the 
court as judge. And the 
reason was this. He 
once asked a friend of 
his who was his 
companion in Cha-no- 
yu, a tea merchant 
named Eiki, to tell him 
frankly what was the 
public opinion about 
him. “ Well,” said Eiki, 
“they say that you get 
irritated with those who 
don V give their 
evidence very clearly 
and scold them, and so 
people are afraid to 
bring lawsuits before 
you and if they do, the 
truth does not come 
out." 

“Ah, l am glad you 
have told me that, ” 
replied Shigemune, “for 
now that / consider it, l 
have fallen into the 
habit of speaking 
sharply to people in 
this way, and no doubt 
humble folk and those 
who are not ready in 
speech get flurried and 
are unable to put their 
case in the best light. 
I will see to it that this 
does not occur in the 
future.” So after this he 
had a tea mill placed 
before him in court and 
in front of it the paper- 
covered shoji were, 
drawn to, and Shige¬ 
mune sat behind them 
and ground the tea and 
thus kept his mind 
calm while he heard 
the cases. And he could 


TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

In January of 1809, an agitated and anxious Napoleon hurried back to 
Paris from his Spanish wars. His spies and confidants had confirmed a 
rumor that his foreign minister Talleyrand had conspired against him with 
Fouche, the minister of police. Immediately on arriving in the capital the 
shocked emperor summoned his ministers to the palace. Following them 
into the meeting right after their arrival, he began pacing up and down, 
and started rambling vaguely about plotters working against him, specula¬ 
tors bringing down the stock market, legislators delaying his policies—and 
his own ministers undermining him. 

As Napoleon talked, Talleyrand leaned on the mantelpiece, looking 
completely indifferent. Facing Talleyrand directly, Napoleon announced, 
“For these ministers, treason has begun when they permit themselves to 
doubt.” At the word “treason” the ruler expected his minister to be afraid. 
But Talleyrand only smiled, calm and bored. 

The sight of a subordinate apparently serene in the face of charges that 
could get him hanged pushed Napoleon to the edge. There were ministers, 
he said, who wanted him dead, and he took a step closer to Talleyrand— 
who stared back at him unfazed. Finally Napoleon exploded. “You are a 
coward,” he screamed in Talleyrand’s face, “a man of no faith. Nothing is 
sacred to you. You would sell your own father, I have showered you with 
riches and yet there is nothing you would not do to hurt me.” The other 
ministers looked at each other in disbelief—they had never seen this fear¬ 
less general, the conqueror of most of Europe, so unhinged. 

“You deserve to be broken like glass,” Napoleon continued, stamping. 
“I have the power to do it, but I have too much contempt for you to bother. 
Why didn’t I have you hanged from the gates of the Tuileries? But there is 
still time for that.” Yelling, almost out of breath, his face red, his eyes 
bulging, he went on, “You, by the way, are nothing but shit in a silk stock¬ 
ing. ... What about your wife? You never told me that San Carlos was your 
wife’s lover?” “Indeed, sire, it did not occur to me that this information had 
any bearing on Your Majesty’s glory or my own,” said Talleyrand calmly, 
completely unflustered. After a few more insults, Napoleon walked away, 
Talleyrand slowly crossed the room, moving with his characteristic limp. 
As an attendant helped him with his cloak, he turned to his fellow ministers 
(all afraid they would never see him again), and said, “What a pity, gentle¬ 
men, that so great a man should have such bad manners.” 

Despite his anger, Napoleon did not arrest his foreign minister. He 
merely relieved him of his duties and banished him from the court, believ¬ 
ing that for this man humiliation would be punishment enough. He did not 
realize that word had quickly spread of his tirade—of how the emperor had 
completely lost control of himself, and how Talleyrand had essentially hu¬ 
miliated him by maintaining his composure and dignity. A page had been 
turned: For the first time people had seen the great emperor lose his cool 
under fire. A feeling spread that he was on the way down. As Talleyrand 
later said, “This is the beginning of the end.” 


326 


LAW 35) 



Interpretation 

This was indeed the beginning of the end. Waterloo was still six years 
ahead, but Napoleon was on a slow descent to defeat, crystallizing in 1812 
with his disastrous invasion of Russia. Talleyrand was the first to see the 
signs of his decline, especially in the irrational war with Spain. Sometime in 
1808, the minister decided that for the future peace of Europe, Napoleon 
had to go. And so he conspired with Fouche. 

It is possible that the conspiracy was never anything more than a 
ploy—a device to push Napoleon over the edge. For it is hard to believe 
that two of the most practical men in history would only go halfway in their 
plotting. They may have been only stirring the waters, trying to goad 
Napoleon into a misstep. And indeed, what they got was the tantrum that 
laid out his loss of control for all to see. In fact, Napoleon’s soon-famous 
blowup that afternoon had a profoundly negative effect on his public 
image. 

This is the problem with the angry response. At first it may strike fear 
and terror, but only in some, and as the days pass and the storm clears, 
other responses emerge—embarrassment and uneasiness about the 
shouter’s capacity for going out of control, and resentment of what has 
been said. Losing your temper, you always make unfair and exaggerated 
accusations. A few such tirades and people are counting the days until you 
are gone, 

In the face of a conspiracy against him, a conspiracy between his two 
most important ministers, Napoleon certainly had a right to feel angry and 
anxious. But by responding so angrily, and so publicly, he only demon* 
strated his frustration. To show your frustration is to show that you have 
lost your power to shape events; it is the helpless action of the child who re¬ 
sorts to a hysterical fit to get his way. The powerful never reveal this kind of 
weakness. 

There were a number of things Napoleon could have done in this situ¬ 
ation. He could have thought about the fact that two eminently sensible 
men had had reason to turn against him, and could have listened and 
learned from them. He could have tried to win them back to him. He could 
even have gotten rid of them, making their imprisonment or death an omi¬ 
nous display of his power. No tirades, no childish fits, no embarrassing 
after-effects—-just a quiet and definitive severing of ties. 

Remember: Tantrums neither intimidate nor inspire loyalty. They 
only create doubts and uneasiness about your power. Exposing your weak¬ 
ness, these stormy eruptions often herald a fall. 

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

By the late 1920s, Haile Selassie had nearly achieved his goal of assuming 
total control over Ethiopia, a country he felt needed strong and unified 
leadership. As regent to the empress Zauditu {stepdaughter of the late 
queen) and heir to the throne, Selassie had spent several years weakening 
the power of Ethiopia’s various warlords. Now only one real obstacle stood 


easily see whether his 
composure was ruffled 
or not by looking at the 
tea, which would not 
fall evenly ground to 
the proper consistency 
if he got excited. And 
so justice was done 
impartially and people 
went away from his 
court satisfied , 

CHA-NO-YU: 

THE JAPANESE TEA 
CEREMONY 
A. L. 8aDL.BR, 

1962 


If possible, no animos¬ 
ity should be felt for 
anyone... .To speak 
angrily to a person, to 
show your hatred by 
what you say or by the 
way you look , is an 
unnecessary proceed¬ 
ing — dangerous, fool¬ 
ish, ridiculous, and 
vulgar. 

A nger or hatred should 
never be shown other¬ 
wise than in what you 
do; and feelings will be 
all the more effective in 
action, in so far as you 
avoid the exhibition of 
them in any other way. 
It is only the cold¬ 
blooded animals whose 
bite is poisonous. 

Arthur 

Schopenhauer. 

1788-1860 


LAW 39 327 



THK MOMCKY AND 
['ID'. WASP 


A monkey , whilst 
munching a ripe pear, 
was pestered by the 
bare-faced importuni¬ 
ties of a wasp, who, 
nolens volens, would 
have a part. After 
threatening the monkey 
with his anger if he 
further hesitated to 
submit to his demand, 
he settled on the fruit , 
but was as soon 
knocked off by the 
monkey. 
The irritable wasp now 
had recourse to invec¬ 
tive — and, after using 
the most insulting 
language, which the 
other calmly listened 
to, he so worked 
himself up into violent 
passion that, losing all 
consideration of the 
penalty, he. flew to the 
face of the monkey, 
and stung him with 
such rage that he was 
unable to extricate his 
weapon, and was 
compelled to tear 
himself away, leaving it 
in the wound—thus 
entailing on himself a 
lingering death, accom¬ 
panied by pains much 
greater than those he 
had inflicted. 

FABtF.S, 
Jonathan Birch, 
17831847 


in his way: the empress and her husband, Ras Gugsa. Selassie knew the 
royal couple hated him and wanted to get rid of him, so to cut short their 
plotting he made Gugsa the governor of the northern province of 
Begemeder, forcing him to leave the capital, where the empress lived. 

For several years Gugsa played the loyal administrator. But Selassie 
did not trust him: He knew that Gugsa and the empress were plotting re- 
venge. As time passed and Gugsa made no move, the chances of a plot 
only increased. Selassie knew what he had to do: draw Gugsa out, get 
under his skin, and push him into action before he was ready. 

For several years, a northern tribe, the Azebu Gallas, had been in vir¬ 
tual rebellion against the throne, robbing and pillaging local villages and 
refusing to pay taxes. Selassie had done nothing to stop them, letting them 
grow stronger. Finally, in 1929, he ordered Ras Gugsa to lead an army 
against these disobedient tribesmen, Gugsa agreed, but inwardly he 
seethed—he had no grudge against the Azebu Gallas, and the demand that 
he fight them hurt his pride. He could not disobey the order, but as he 
worked to put together an army, he began to spread an ugly rumor—that 
Selassie was in cahoots with the pope, and planned to convert the country 
to Roman Catholicism and make it a colony of Italy, Gugsa’s army swelled, 
and some of the tribes from which its soldiers came secretly agreed to fight 
Selassie, In March of 1930 an enormous force of 35,000 men began to 
march, not on die Azebu Gallas but south, toward the capital of Addis 
Ababa. Made confident by his growing strength, Gugsa now openly led a 
holy war to depose Selassie and put the country back in the hands of true 
Christians. 

He did not see the trap that had been laid for him. Before Selassie had 
ordered Gugsa to fight the Azebu Gallas, he had secured the support of the 
Ethiopian church. And before the revolt got underway, he had bribed sev¬ 
eral of Gugsa’s key allies not to show up for battle. As the rebel army 
marched south, airplanes flew overhead dropping leaflets announcing that 
the highest church officials had recognized Selassie as the true Christian 
leader of Ethiopia, and that they had excommunicated Gugsa for foment¬ 
ing a civil war. These leaflets severely blunted the emotions behind the 
holy crusade. And as battle loomed and the support that Gugsa’s allies had 
promised him failed to show up, soldiers began to flee or defect. 

When the battle came, the rebel army quicky collapsed. Refusing to 
surrender, Ras Gugsa was killed in the fighting. The empress, distraught 
over her husband’s death, died a few days later. On April 30, Selassie is¬ 
sued a formal proclamation announcing his new title: Emperor of Ethiopia. 

Interpretation 

Haile Selassie always saw several moves ahead. He knew that if he let Ras 
Gugsa decide the time and place of the revolt, the danger would be much 
greater than if he forced Gugsa to act on Selassie’s terms. So he goaded him 
into rebellion by offending his manly pride, asking him to fight people he 
had no quarrel with on behalf of a man he hated. Thinking everything out 


328 


LAW 39 



ahead, Selassie made sure that Gugsa’s rebellion would come to nothing, 
and that he could use it to do away with his last two enemies. 

This is the essence of the Law: When the waters are still, your oppo¬ 
nents have the time and space to plot actions that they will initiate and con¬ 
trol. So stir the waters, force the fish to the surface, get them to act before 
they are ready, steal the initiative. The best way to do this is to play on un¬ 
controllable emotions—pride, vanity, love, hate. Once the water is stirred 
up, the little fish cannot help but rise to the bait. The angrier they become, 
the less control they have, and finally they are caught in the whirlpool you 
have made, and they drown. 

A sovereign should never launch an army out of anger, 
a leader should never start a war out of wrath . 

Sun-lzu. fourth century B.c. 


KEYS TO POWER 

Angry people usually end up looking ridiculous, for their response seems 
out of proportion to what occasioned it. They have taken things too seri¬ 
ously, exaggerating the hurt or insult that has been done to them. They are 
so sensitive to slight that it becomes comical how much they take person¬ 
ally. More comical still is their belief that their outbursts signify power. The 
truth is the opposite: Petulance is not power, it is a sign of helplessness. 
People may temporarily be cowed by your tantrums, but in the end they 
lose respect for you. They also realize they can easily undermine a person 
with so little self-controL 

The answer, however, is not to repress our angry or emotional re¬ 
sponses. For repression drains us of energy and pushes us into strange be¬ 
havior. Instead we have to change our perspective: We have to realize that 
nothing in the social realm, and in the game of power, is personal. 

Everyone is caught up in a chain of events that long predates the pre¬ 
sent moment. Our anger often stems from problems in our childhood, 
from the problems of our parents which stem from their own childhood, on 
and on. Our anger also has roots in the many interactions with others, the 
accumulated disappointments and heartaches that we have suffered. An in¬ 
dividual will often appear as the instigator of our anger but it is much more 
complicated, goes far beyond what that individual did to us. If a person ex¬ 
plodes with anger at you (and it seems out of proportion to what you did to 
them), you must remind yourself that it is not exclusively directed at you— 
do not be so vain. The cause is much larger, goes way back in time, in¬ 
volves dozens of prior hurts, and is actually not worth the bother to 
understand. Instead of seeing it as a personal grudge, look at the emotional 
outburst as a disguised power move, an attempt to control or punish you 
cloaked in the form of hurt feelings and anger. 

This shift of perspective will let you play the game of power with more 
clarity and energy. Instead of overreacting, and becoming ensnared in peo~ 


DITCH HIGH PRIEST 

Kin’yo, an officer of the 
second rank , had a 
brother called the High 
Priest Ryogaku, an 
extremely bad- 
tempered man. Next to 
his monastery grew a 
large nettle-tree which 
occasioned the nick¬ 
name people gave him, 
the Nettle-tree High 
Priest“That name is 
outrageous ” said the 
high priest , and cut 
down the tree. The 
stump still being left, 
people referred to him 
now as the Stump High 
Priest. More furious 
than ever, Ryogaku had 
the stump dug up and 
thrown away , but this 
left a big ditch. People 
now called him the 
Ditch High Priest. 
ESSAYS IN IDLENESS, 

Kenko, 

jAi’AN, 

EOimTCEN'ffl CENTURY 


LAW 3P 


329 



pie’s emotions, you will turn their loss of control to your advantage: You 
keep your head while they are losing theirs. 

During an important battle in the War of the Three Kingdoms, in the 
third century A.D., advisers to the commander Ts’ao Ts’ao discovered docu¬ 
ments showing that certain of his generals had conspired with the enemy, 
and urged him to arrest and execute them. Instead he ordered the docu¬ 
ments burned and the matter forgotten. At this critical moment in the bat¬ 
tle, to get upset or demand justice would have reverberated against him; 
An angry action would have called attention to the generals’ disloyalty, 
which would have harmed the troops’ morale. Justice could wait—he 
would deal with the generals in time. Ts’ao Ts’ao kept his head and made 
the right decision. 

Compare this to Napoleon’s response to Talleyrand: Instead of taking 
the conspiracy personally, the emperor should have played the game like 
Ts’ao Ts’ao, carefully weighing the consequences of any action he took. 
The more powerful response in the end would have been to ignore Tal¬ 
leyrand, or to bring the minister gradually back to his side and punish him 
later. 

Anger only cuts off our options, and the powerful cannot thrive with¬ 
out options. Once you train yourself not to take matters personally, and to 
control your emotional responses, you will have placed yourself in a posi¬ 
tion of tremendous power: Now you can play with the emotional responses 
of other people. Stir the insecure into action by impugning their manhood, 
and by dangling the prospect of an easy victory before their faces. Do as 
Houdini did when challenged by the less successful escape artist Kleppini; 
Reveal an apparent weakness (Houdini let Kleppini steal the combination 
for a pair of cuffs) to lure your opponent into action. Then you can beat 
him with ease. With the arrogant too you can appear weaker than you are, 
taunting them into a rash action. 

Sun Pin, commander of the armies of Ch’i and loyal disciple of Sun- 
tzu, once led his troops against the armies of Wei, which outnumbered him 
two to one. “Let us light a hundred thousand fires when our army enters 
Wei,” suggested Sun Pin, “fifty thousand on the next day, and only thirty 
thousand on the third.” On the third day the Wei general exclaimed, “I 
knew the men of Ch’i were cowards, and after only three days more than 
half of them have deserted!” So, leaving behind his slow-moving heavy in¬ 
fantry', the general decided to seize the moment and move swiftly on the 
Ch’i camp with a lightly armed force. Sun Pin’s troops retreated, luring 
Wei’s army into a narrow pass, where they ambushed and destroyed them. 
With the Wei general dead and his forces decimated, Sun Pin now easily 
defeated the rest of his army. 

In the face of a hot-headed enemy, finally, an excellent response is no 
response. Follow the Talleyrand tactic: Nothing is as infuriating as a man 
who keeps his cool while others are losing theirs. If it will work to your ad¬ 
vantage to unsettle people, affect the aristocratic, bored pose, neither 
mocking nor triumphant but simply indifferent. This will light their fuse. 




When they embarrass themselves with a temper tantrum, you will have 
gained several victories, one of these being that in the face of their childish¬ 
ness you have maintained your dignity and composure. 


Image: The Pond of Fish. The waters 
are clear and calm, and the fish are well below the surface. 
Stir the waters and they emerge. Stir it some more and they get 
angry, rising to the surface, biting whatever comes near- 
including a freshly baited hook. 


Authority: If your opponent is of a hot temper, try to irritate him. If he 
is arrogant, try to encourage his egotism, . . . One who is skilled at 
making the enemy move does so by creating a situation according to 
which the enemy will act; he entices the enemy with something he is 
certain to take. He keeps the enemy on the move by holding out bait 
and then attacks him with picked troops. (Sun-tzu, fourth century B.C.) 


REVERSAL 

When playing with people’s emotions you have to be careful. Study the 
enemy beforehand: Some fish are best left: at the bottom of the pond. 

The leaders of the city of Tyre, capital of ancient Phoenicia, felt confi¬ 
dent they could withstand Alexander the Great, who had conquered the 
Orient but had not attacked their city, which stood well protected on the 
water. They sent ambassadors to Alexander saying that although they 
would recognize him as emperor they would not allow him or his forces to 
enter Tyre. This of course enraged him, and he immediately mounted a 
siege. For four months the city withstood him, and finally he decided that 
the straggle was not worth it, and that he would come to terms with the 
Tyrians. But they, feeling that they had already baited Alexander and got¬ 
ten away with it, and confident that they could withstand him, refused to 



negotiate—in fact they killed his messengers. 

This pushed Alexander over the edge. Now it did not matter to him 
how long the siege lasted or how large an army it needed; he had the re¬ 
sources, and would do whatever it took. He remounted his assault so stren¬ 
uously that he captured Tyre within days, burned it to the ground, and sold 
its people into slavery. 

You can bait the powerful and get them to commit and divide their 
forces as Sun Pin did, but test the waters first Find the gap in their strength. 
If there is no gap—if they are impossibly strong—you have noihing to gain 
and everything to lose by provoking them. Choose carefully whom you 
bait, and never stir up the sharks. 

Finally there are times when a well-timed burst of anger can do you 
good, but your anger must be manufactured and under your control. Then 
you can determine exactly how and on whom it will fall. Never stir up re¬ 
actions that will work against you in the long run. And use your thunder¬ 
bolts rarely, to make them the more intimidating and meaningful. Whether 
purposefully staged or not, if your outbursts come too often, they will lose 
their power. 




LAW 



DESPISE THE 
FREE LUNCH 


JUDGMENT 

What is offered forfree is dangerous—it usually involves 
either a trick or a hidden obligation. What has worth is 
worth paying for. By paying your own way you stay 
clear of gratitude , guilt, and deceit. It is also often wise 
to pay the full pnce—there is no cutting comers with ex¬ 
cellence. Be lavish with your money and keep it cir¬ 
culating, for generosity is a sign and a magnet for 
power. 



IH'HIKD TKKASrm-; 

Many weak-minded 
persons in cities hope 
io discover property 
under the surface of the 
earth and to make 
some profit from it.. In 
the Maghrib there are 
many Berber 
“students ” who are 
unable to make a living 
by natural ways and 
means. They approach 
well-to-do people with 
papers (hat have torn 
margins and contain 
either non-Arabic writ¬ 
ing or what they claim 
to he the translation of 
a document written by 
the owner of buried 
treasures, giving the 
clue to the hiding place. 
In this way , they try to 
get their sustenance by 
Ipersuading the well- 
to-do) to send them out 
to dig and hunt for 
treasure. Occasionally, 
one of these treasure 
hunters displays 
strange information or 
some remarkable trick 
of magic with which he 
fools people into 
believing his other 
claims, although, 
in fact, he knows 
nothing of magic and 
its procedures.... 
The things that have 
been said about (trea¬ 
sure hunting] have no 
scientific basis, nor are 
they based upon 
[factual] information . 

It should be realized 
that although treasures 
are found, this happens 
rarely and by chance , 
not by systematic 

search _ Those who 

are deluded or afflicted 
by these things must 
take refuge in God 


MONEY AND POWER 

In the realm of power, everything must be judged by its cost, and every¬ 
thing has a price. What is offered for free or at bargain rates often comes 
with a psychological price tag—complicated feelings of obligation, com¬ 
promises with quality, the insecurity those compromises bring, on and on. 
The powerful learn early to protect their most valuable resources: indepen¬ 
dence and room to maneuver. By paying the full price, they keep them¬ 
selves free of dangerous entanglements and worries. 

Being open and flexible with money also teaches the value of strategic 
generosity, a variation on the old trick of “giving when you are about to 
take.” By giving the appropriate gift, you put the recipient under obliga¬ 
tion, Generosity softens people up—to be deceived. By gaining a reputa¬ 
tion for liberality, you win people’s admiration while distracting them from 
your power plays. By strategically spreading your wealth, you charm the 
other courtiers, creating pleasure and making valuable allies. 

Look at the masters of power—the Caesars, the Queen Elizabeths, the 
Michelangelos, the Medicis: Not a miser among them. Even the great con 
artiste spend freely to swindle. Tight purse strings are unattractive—when 
engaged in seduction, Casanova would give completely not only of himself 
but of his wallet. The powerful understand that money is psychologically 
charged, and that it is also a vessel of politeness and sociability. They make 
the human side of money a weapon in their armory. 

For everyone able to play with money, thousands more are locked in a 
self-destructive refusal to use money creatively and strategically. These 
types represent the opposite pole to the powerful, and you must learn to 
recognize them—either to avoid their poisonous natures or to turn their in¬ 
flexibility to your advantage: 

The Greedy Fish. The greedy fish take the human side out of money. 
Cold and ruthless, they see only the lifeless balance sheet; viewing others 
solely as either pawns or obstructions in their pursuit of wealth, they tram¬ 
ple on people’s sentiments and alienate valuable allies. No one wants to 
work with the greedy fish, and over the years they end up isolated, which 
often proves their undoing. 

Greedy fish are the con artist’s bread and butter: Lured by the bait of 
easy money, they swallow the ruse hook, line, and sinker. They are easy to 
deceive, for they spend so much time dealing with numbers (not with peo¬ 
ple) that they become blind to psychology, including their own. Either 
avoid them before they exploit you or play on their greed to your gain. 

The Bargain Demon. Powerful people judge everything by what it costs, 
not just in money but in time, dignity, and peace of mind. And this is ex¬ 
actly what Bargain Demons cannot do. Wasting valuable time digging for 
bargains, they worry endlessly about what they could have gotten else¬ 
where for a little less. On top of that, the bargain item they do buy is often 
shabby; perhaps it needs costly repairs, or will have to be replaced twice as 


334 l LAW 4 0 



fast as a high-quality item. The costs of these pursuits—not always in 
money (though the price of a bargain is often deceptive) but in time and 
peace of mind—discourage normal people from undertaking them, but for 
the Bargain Demon the bargain is an end in itself. 

These types might seem to harm only themselves, but their attitudes 
are contagious: Unless you resist them they will infect you with the inse¬ 
cure feeling that you should have looked harder to find a cheaper price. 
Don’t argue with them or try to change them. Just mentally add up the 
cost, in time and inner peace if not in hidden financial expense, of the irra¬ 
tional pursuit of a bargain. 

The Sadist* Financial sadists play vicious power games with money as a 
way of asserting their power. They might, for example, make you wait for 
money that is owed you, promising you that the check is in the mail. Or if 
they hire you to work for them, they meddle in every aspect of the job, 
haggling and giving you ulcers. Sadists seem to think that paying for some¬ 
thing gives them the right to torture and abuse the seller. They have no 
sense of the courtier element in money. If you are unlucky enough to get 
involved with this type, accepting a financial loss may be better in the long 
run than getting entangled in their destructive power games. 

The Indiscriminate Giver. Generosity has a definite function in power: 
It attracts people, softens them up, makes allies out of them. But it has to be 
used strategically, with a definite end in mind. Indiscriminate Givers, on 
the other hand, are generous because they want to be loved and admired 
by all And their generosity is so indiscriminate and needy that it may not 
have the desired effect: If they give to one and all, why should the recipient 
feel special? Attractive as it may seem to make an Indiscriminate Giver 
your mark, in any involvement with this type you will often feel burdened 
by their insatiable emotional needs. 


TRANSGRESSIONS OF THE LAW 
Transgression I 

After Francisco Pizarro conquered Peru, in 1532, gold from the Incan Em¬ 
pire began to pour into Spain, and Spaniards of all classes started dreaming 
of the instant riches to be had in the New World. The story soon spread of 
an Indian chief to the east of Peru who once each year would ritually cover 
himself in gold dust and dive into a lake. Soon word of mouth transformed 
El Dorado , the “Golden Man,” into an empire called El Dorado, wealthier 
than the Incan, where the streets were paved and the buildings inlaid with 
gold. This elaboration of the story did not seem implausible, for surely a 
chief who could afford to waste gold dust in a lake must rule a golden em¬ 
pire. Soon Spaniards were searching for El Dorado all over northern South 
America, 


from their inability to 
make a living and their 
laziness in this respect. 
They should not 
occupy themselves with 
absurdities and untrue 
stories. 

THE MUOADDIMAH, 

Ibn KhaldOn. 
1332-1406 


THE MJfcKR 

A miser, to make sure 
of his property, sold all 
that he had and 
converted it into a great 
lump of gold, which he 
hid in a hole in the 
ground, and went 
continually to visit and 
inspect it. This roused 
the curiosity of one of 
his workmen, who, 
suspecting that, there 
was a treasure, when 
his master's back was 
turned, went to the 
spot, and stole it away. 
When the miser 
returned and found the 
place empty, he wept 
and tore his hair. But a 
neighbor who saw him 
in this extravagant 
grief, and learned the 
cause of it, s aid: “Fret 
thyself no longer, but 
take a stone and put it 
in the same place, and 
think that it is your 
lump of gold; for, as 
you never meant to use 
it, the one will do you 
much good as the 
other.’' 

The worth of money is 
not in its possession , 
bur in its use. 

fables. 

Aesop, 

SIXTH CENTURY S-C. 


LAW 40 , 335 



There is a popular 
saying in Japan that 
goes “Tada yori takai 
mono wa nai.” mean¬ 
ing: "Nothing is more 
costly than something 
given free, of charge.” 
THE UNSPOKEN WAY, 

Michihiro 

Matsumoto, 

1988 


MONKY 

Yusuf I bn Jafar el- 
Amudi used to take 
sums of money, some¬ 
times very large ones, 
from those who came 
to study with him. 
A distinguished legalist 
visiting him once said: 
“/ am enchanted and 
impressed by your 
teachings, and / am 
sure that you are 
directing your disciples 
in a proper manner. 
But it is not in accor¬ 
dance with tradition to 
take money for knowl¬ 
edge. Besides, the 
action is open to misin¬ 
terpretation. ” 
El-Amudi said: “/ have 
never sold any knowl¬ 
edge. There is no 
money on earth suffi¬ 
cient to pay for it. As 
for misinterpretation, 
the abstaining from 
taking money will not 
prevent it, for it will 
find some other object. 
Rather should you 
know that a man who 
takes money may be 
greedy for money, or 
he may not. But a man 
who takes nothing at 
all is under the gravest 

336 


In February of 1541, the largest expedition yet in this venture, led by 
Pizarro’s brother Gonzalo, left Quito, in Ecuador. Resplendent in their ar¬ 
mors and colorful silks, 340 Spaniards headed east, along with 4,000 Indi¬ 
ans to carry supplies and serve as scouts, 4,000 swine, dozens of llamas, 
and close to 1,000 dogs. But the expedition was soon hit by torrential rain, 
which rotted its gear and spoiled its food. Meanwhile, as Gonzalo Pizarro 
questioned the Indians they met along the way, those who seemed to be 
withholding information, or who had not even heard of the fabulous king¬ 
dom, he would torture and feed to the dogs. Word of the Spaniards’ mur¬ 
derousness spread quickly among the Indians, who realized that the only 
way to avoid Gonzalo’s wrath was to make up stories about El Dorado 
and send him as far away as possible. As Gonzalo and his men followed 
the leads the Indians gave them, then, they were only led farther into deep 
jungle. 

The explorers’ spirits sagged. Their uniforms had long since shredded; 
their armor rusted and they threw it away; their shoes were tom to pieces, 
forcing them to walk barefoot; the Indian slaves they had set out with had 
either died or deserted them; they had eaten not only the swine but the 
hunting dogs and llamas. They lived on roots and fruit. Realizing that they 
could not continue this way, Pizarro decided to risk river travel, and a 
barge was built out of rotting wood. But the journey down the treacherous 
Napo River proved no easier. Setting up camp on the river’s edge, Gonzalo 
sent scouts ahead on the barge to find Indian settlements with food. He 
waited and waited for the scouts to return, only to find out they had de¬ 
cided to desert the expedition and continue down the river on their own. 

The rain continued without end. Gonzalo’s men forgot about El Do¬ 
rado; they wanted only to return to Quito. Finally, in August of 1542, a lit¬ 
tle over a hundred men, from an expedition originally numbering in the 
thousands, managed to find their way back. To the residents of Quito they 
seemed to have emerged from hell itself, wrapped in tatters and skins, their 
bodies covered in sores, and so emaciated as to be unrecognizable. For 
over a year and a half they had marched in an enormous circle, two thou¬ 
sand miles by foot. The vast sums of money invested in the expedition had 
yielded nothing—no sign of El Dorado and no sign of gold. 

Interpretation 

Even after Gonzalo Pizarro’s disaster, the Spaniards launched expedition 
after expedition in search of El Dorado. And like Pizarro the conquistadors 
would bum and loot villages, torture Indians, endure unimaginable hard¬ 
ships, and get no closer to gold. The money they spent on such expeditions 
cannot be calculated; yet despite the futility of the search, the lure of the 
fantasy endured. 

Not only did the search for El Dorado cost millions of lives—both In¬ 
dian and Spanish—it helped bring the ruin of the Spanish empire. Gold be¬ 
came Spain’s obsession. The gold that did find its way back to Spain—and 
a lot did—was reinvested in more expeditions, or in the purchase of luxu¬ 
ries, rather than in agriculture or any other productive endeavor. Whole 
Spanish towns were depopulated as their menfolk left to hunt gold. Farms 


LAW 40 



fell into ruin, and the army had no recruits for its European wars. By the 
end of the seventeenth century, the entire country had shrunk by more 
than half of its population; the city of Madrid had gone from a population 
of 400,000 to 150,000. With diminishing returns from its efforts over so 
many years, Spain fell into a decline from which it never recovered. 

Power requires self-discipline. The prospect of wealth, particularly 
easy, sudden wealth, plays havoc with the emotions. The suddenly rich be¬ 
lieve that more is always possible. The free lunch, the money that will fall 
into your lap, is just around the corner. 

In this delusion the greedy neglect everything power really depends 
on: self-control, the goodwill of others, and so on. Understand: With one 
exception—death—no lasting change in fortune comes quickly. Sudden 
wealth rarely lasts, for it is built on nothing solid. Never let lust for money 
lure you out of the protective and enduring fortress of real power. Make 
power your goal and money will find its way to you. Leave El Dorado for 
suckers and fools. 

Transgression II 

In the early eighteenth century, no one stood higher in English society 
than the Duke and Duchess of Marlborough. The duke, having led suc¬ 
cessful campaigns against the French, was considered Europe’s premier 
general and strategist. And his wife, the duchess, after much maneuvering, 
had established herself as the favorite of Queen Anne, who became ruler 
of England in 1702. In 1704 the duke’s triumph at the Battle of Blenheim 
made him the toast of England, and to honor him the queen awarded him 
a large plot of land in the town of Woodstock, and the funds to create a 
great palace there. Calling his planned home the Palace of Blenheim, the 
duke chose as his architect the young John Vanbrugh, a kind of Renais¬ 
sance man who wrote plays as well as designed buildings. And so con¬ 
struction began, in the summer of 1705, with much fanfare and great 
hopes. 

Vanbrugh had a dramatist’s sense of architecture. His palace was to be 
a monument to Marlborough’s brilliance and power, and was to include 
artificial lakes, enormous bridges, elaborate gardens, and other fantastical 
touches. From day one, however, the duchess could not be pleased: She 
thought Vanbrugh was wasting money on yet another stand of trees; she 
wanted the palace finished as soon as possible. The duchess tortured Van¬ 
brugh and his workmen on every detail. She was consumed with petty 
matters; although the government was paying for Blenheim, she counted 
every penny. Eventually her grumbling, about Blenheim and other things 
too, created an irreparable rift between her and Queen Anne, who, in 1711, 
dismissed her from the court, ordering her to vacate her apartments at the 
royal palace. When the duchess left (fuming over the loss of her position, 
and also of her royal salary), she emptied the apartment of every fixture 
down to die brass doorknobs. 

Over the next ten years, work on Blenheim would stop and start, as 
the funds became harder to procure from the government. The duchess 


suspicion of robbing 
the disciple of his soul. 
People who say, 7 take 
nothing ,' may be found 
to take away the voli¬ 
tion of their victim.’' 

THE- DERMIS PROBE, 

Idries Shah, 

1970 


TIIK MAN WHO 
LOVED MONKV BKTTEH 
THAN LI I K 

In ancient times there 
h'jm an old woodcutter 
who went to the moun¬ 
tain almost every day 
to cut wood. 

It was said that this old 
man was a miser who 
hoarded his silver until 
it changed to gold, and 
(hat he cared more for 
gold than anything else 
in all the world . 

One day a wilderness 
tiger sprang at him and 
though he ran he could 
not escape, and the 
tiger carried him off in 
its mouth. 

The woodcutter's son 
saw his father's danger, 
and ran to save him if 
possible. He carried a 
long knife, and as he 
could run faster than 
the tiger, who had a 
man to carry, he soon 
overtook them. 

His father was not 
much hurt, for the tiger 
held him by his clothes. 
When the old woodcut¬ 
ter saw his son about to 
slab the tiger he called 
out in great alarm: 

"Do not spoil the 
tiger’s skin! Do not 
spoil the tiger's skin! If 
you can kill him with¬ 
out cutting holes in his 


LAW 40 




skin we can get many 
pieces of silver for it. 
Kill him, hut do not cut 
his body" 
While the son H’fl.9 
listening to h is f ather's 
instructions the tiger 
suddenly dashed off 
into the forest, carrying 
the old man where the 
son could not reach 
him, and he war soon 
killed. 
'‘Chinese fable.” 

VARIOUS FABLES 

from various places. 
Diane di Pkima. kl>., 
I960 


TIIK STORY OF MOSkS 
AND I’ll AH.ACM I 

It is Written in the 
histories of the 
prophets that Moses 
was sent to Pharaoh 
with many miracles, 
wonders and honors. 
Now the daily ration 
for Pharaoh j table H’fl.? 
4,000 sheep , 400 cows, 
200 camels, and a 
corresponding amount 
of chickens, fish, bever¬ 
ages, fried meats, 
sweets, and other 
things. All the people of 
Egypt and all his army 
used to eat at his table 
every day. For 400 
years he had claimed 
divinity and never 
ceased providing this 
food. 

When Moses prayed, 
saying, "O Lord, 
destroy PharaohCod 
answered his: prayer 
and said, “l shall 
destroy him in water, 
and l shall bestow all 
his wealth and that of 
his soldiers on you and 
your peoples." Several 


thought Vanbrugh was out to min her. She quibbled over every carload of 
stone and bushel of Iime t counted every extra yard of iron railing or foot of 
wainscot, hurling abuse at the wasteful workmen, contractors, and survey¬ 
ors. Marlborough, old and weary, wanted nothing more than to settle into 
the palace in his last years, but the project became bogged down in a 
swamp of litigation, the workmen suing the duchess for wages, the duchess 
suing the architect right back. In the midst of this interminable wrangling, 
the duke died. He had never spent a night in his beloved Blenheim. 

After Marlborough’s death, it became dear that he had a vast estate, 
worth over £2 million—more than enough to pay for finishing the palace. 
But the duchess would not relent: She held back Vanbrugh’s wages as well 
as the workmen’s, and finally had the architect dismissed. The man who 
took his place finished Blenheim in a few years, following Vanbrugh’s de¬ 
signs to the letter. Vanbrugh died in 1726, locked out of the palace by the 
duchess, unable to set foot in his greatest creation. Foreshadowing the ro¬ 
mantic movement, Blenheim had started a whole new trend in architec¬ 
ture, but had given its creator a twenty-year nightmare. 

Interpretation 

For the Duchess of Marlborough, money was a way to play sadistic power 
games. She saw the loss of money as a symbolic loss of power. With Van¬ 
brugh her contortions went deeper still: He was a great artist, and she en¬ 
vied his power to create, to attain a fame outside her reach. She may not 
have had his gifts, but she did have the money to torture and abuse him 
over the pettiest details—to ruin his life. 

This kind of sadism, however, bears an awful price. It made construc¬ 
tion that should have lasted ten years take twenty. It poisoned many a rela¬ 
tionship, alienated the duchess from the court, deeply pained the duke 
(who wanted only to live peacefully in Blenheim}, created endless lawsuits, 
and took years off Vanbrugh’s life. Finally, too, posterity had the last word: 
Vanbrugh is recognized as a genius while the duchess is forever remem¬ 
bered for her consummate cheapness. 

The powerful must have grandeur of spirit—they can never reveal any 
pettiness. And money is the most visible arena in which to display either 
grandeur or pettiness. Best spend freely, then, and create a reputation for 
generosity, which in the end will pay great dividends. Never let financial 
details blind you to the bigger picture of how people perceive you. Their 
resentment will cost you in the long run. And if you want to meddle in die 
work of creative people under your hire, at least pay them well. Your 
money will buy their submission better than your displays of power. 


OBSERVANCES OF THE LAW 
Observance I 

Pietro Aretino, son of a lowly shoemaker, had catapulted himself into fame 
as a writer of biting satires. But like every Renaissance artist, he needed to 
find a patron who would give him a comfortable lifestyle while not inter- 


338 I .AW 40 



fering with his work. In 1528 Aretino decided to attempt a new strategy in 
the patronage game. Leaving Rome, he established himself in Venice, 
where few had heard of him. He had a fair amount of money he had man¬ 
aged to save, but little else. Soon after he moved into his new home, how¬ 
ever, he threw open its doors to rich and poor, regaling them with 
banquets and amusements. He befriended each and every gondolier, tip¬ 
ping them royally. In the streets, he spread his money liberally, giving it 
away to beggars, orphans, washerwomen. Among the city’s commoners, 
word quickly spread that Aretino was more than just a great writer, he was 
a man of power—a kind of lord. 

Artists and men of influence soon began to frequent Aretino’s house. 
Within a few years he made himself a celebrity; no visiting dignitary would 
think of leaving Venice without paying him a call. His generosity had cost 
him most of his savings, but had bought him influence and a good name— 
a cornerstone in the foundation of power. Since in Renaissance Italy as 
elsewhere the ability to spend freely was the privilege of the rich, the aris¬ 
tocracy thought Aretino had to be a man of influence, since he spent 
money like one. And since the influence of a man of influence is worth 
buying, Aretino became the recipient of ail sorts of gifts and moneys. 
Dukes and duchesses, wealthy merchants, and popes and princes com¬ 
peted to gain his favor, and showered him with all kinds of presents. 

Aretino’s spending habits, of course, were strategic, and the strategy 
worked like a charm. But for real money and comfort he needed a great 
patron’s bottomless pockets. Having surveyed the possibilities, he eventu¬ 
ally set his sights on the extremely wealthy Marquis of Mantua, and wrote 
an epic poem that he dedicated to the marquis. This was a common prac¬ 
tice of writers looking for patronage: In exchange for a dedication they 
would get a small stipend, enough to write yet another poem, so that they 
spent their lives in a kind of constant servility. Aretino, however, wanted 
power, not a measly wage. He might dedicate a poem to the marquis, but 
he would offer it to him as a gift, implying by doing so that he was not a 
hired hack looking for a stipend but that he and the marquis were equals. 

Aretino’s gift-giving did not stop there: As a close friend of two of 
Venice’s greatest artists, the sculptor Jacopo Sansovino and the painter 
Titian, he convinced these men to participate in his gift-giving scheme. 
Aretino had studied the marquis before going to work on him, and knew 
his taste inside and out; he was able to advise Sansovino and Titian what 
subject matter would please the marquis most. When he then sent a Sanso¬ 
vino sculpture and a Titian painting to the marquis as gifts from all three of 
them, the man was beside himself with joy. 

Over the next few months, Aretino sent other gifts—swords, saddles, 
the glass that was a Venetian specialty, things he knew the marquis prized. 
Soon he, Titian, and Sansovino began to receive gifts from the marquis in 
return. And the strategy went further: When the son-in-law of a friend of 
Aretino’s found himself in jail in Mantua, Aretino was able to get the mar¬ 
quis to arrange his release. Aretino’s friend, a wealthy merchant, was a 
man of great influence in Venice; by turning the goodwill he had built up 


years passed by after 
this promise, and 
Pharaoh, doomed to 
ruin, continued to live 
in all his magnificence . 
Moses was impatient 
for God to destroy 
Pharaoh quickly, and 
he could not endure to 
wait any longer ; So he 
fasted for forty days 
and went to Mount 
Sinai, and in his 
communing with god 
he said, “O Lord, Thou 
didst promise that 
Thou wouldst destroy 
Pharaoh, and still he 
has forsaken none of 
his blasphemies and. 
pretensions. So when 
wilt Thou destroy 
him?” 

A voice came from The 
Truth saying, "O 
Moses, you want Me to 
destroy Pharaoh as 
quickly as possible, but 
a thousand times a 
thousand of My 
servants want Me never 
to do so, because they 
partake of his bounty 
and enjoy tranquillity 
under his rule. By My 
power I swear that as 
long as he provides 
abundant food and 
comfort for My crea¬ 
tures, / shall not 
destroy him ." 

Moses said, “Then 
when will Thy promise 
be fulfilled? ” God said, 
“My promise will be 
fulfilled when he with¬ 
holds his provision 
from Mv creatures. If 
e ver he begins to lessen 
his bounty, know that 
his hour is drawing 
near. ” 

It chanced that one day 
Pharaoh said to 
Human, “Moses has 
gathered the Sons of 
Israel about him and is 
causing us disquiet. We 
know not what will he 


LAW 40 


339 



(he issue of his affair 
with us. We must keep 
our stores full lest at 
any time we he without 
resources. So we must 
halve our daily rations 
and keep the saving in 
reserve. ” He deducted 
2,000 sheep , 200 cows, 
and a 100 camels, and 
similarly every two or 
three days reduced the 
ration. Moses then 
knew that the promise 
of The Truth was near 
to fulfillment, for exces¬ 
sive economy is a sign 
of decline and a bad 
omen. The masters of 
tradition say that on 
the day when Pharaoh 
was drowned only two 
ewes had been killed in 
his kitchen. 
Nothing is better than 
generosity.... If a man 
is rich and desires, 
without a royal charter, 
to act like a lord; if he 
wants men to humble 
themselves before him , 
to revere him and call 
him lord and prince, 
then tell him every day 
to spread a table with 
victuals. All those who 
have acquired renown 
in the worlds have 
gained it mainly 
through hospitality, 
while the miserly and 
avaricious are despised 
in both worlds. 

the book of 
GOVERNMENT OR 
RULES FOR KINGS, 

Njzam al-Mulk, 

ELEVENTH CENTURY 


with the marquis to use, Aretino had now bought this man’s indebtedness, 
too, and he in turn would help Aretino when he could. The circle of influ¬ 
ence was growing wider. Time and again, Aretino was able to cash in on 
the immense political power of the marquis, who also helped him in his 
many court romances. 

Eventually, however, the relationship became strained, as Aretino 
came to feel that the marquis should have requited his generosity better. 
But he would not lower himself to begging or whining: Since the exchange 
of gifts between the two men had made them equals, it would not seem 
right to bring up money. He simply withdrew from the marquis’s circle and 
hunted for other wealthy prey, settling first on the French king Francis, 
then the Medicis, the Duke of Urbino, Emperor Charles V, and more. In 
the end, having many patrons meant he did not have to bow to any of 
them, and his power seemed comparable to that of a great lord. 
Interpretation 

Aretino understood two fundamental properties of money: First, that it has 
to circulate to bring power. What money should buy is not lifeless objects 
but power over people. By keeping money in constant circulation, Aretino 
bought an ever-expanding circle of influence that in the end more than 
compensated him for his expenses. 

Second, Aretino understood the key property of the gift. To give a gift 
is to imply that you and the recipient are equals at the very least, or that 
you are the recipient’s superior. A gift also involves an indebtedness or 
obligation; when friends, for instance, offer you something for free, you 
can be sure they expect something in return, and that to get it they ate 
making you feel indebted, (lire mechanism may or may not be entirely 
conscious on their part, but this is how it works.) 

Aretino avoided such encumbrances on his freedom. Instead of acting 
like a menial who expects the powerful to pay his way in life, he turned the 
whole dynamic around; instead of being indebted to the powerful, he 
made the powerful indebted to him. This was the point of his gift-giving, a 
ladder that carried him to the highest social levels. By the end of his life he 
had become the most famous writer in Europe. 

Understand: Money may determine power relationships, but those re¬ 
lationships need not depend on the amount of money you have; they also 
depend on the way you use it. Powerful people give freely, buying influ¬ 
ence rather than things. If you accept the inferior position because you 
have no fortune yet, you may find yourself in it forever. Play the trick that 
Aretino played on Italy’s aristocracy: Imagine yourself an equal. Play the 
lord, give freely, open your doors, circulate your money, and create the fa¬ 
cade of powder through an alchemy that transforms money into influence. 

Observance II 

Soon after Baron James Rothschild made his fortune in Paris in the early 
1820s, he faced his most intractable problem: How could a Jew and a Ger¬ 
man, a total outsider to French society, win the respect of the xenophobic 
French upper classes? Rothschild was a man who understood power—he 


$40 \ LAW 40 



knew that his fortune would bring him status, but that if he remained so¬ 
cially alienated neither his status nor his fortune would last. So he looked at 
the society of the time and asked what would win their hearts. 

Charity? The French couldn’t care less. Political influence? He already 
had that, and if any dung it only made people more suspicious of him. The 
one weak spot, he decided, was boredom. In the period of the restoration 
of the monarchy, the French upper classes were bored. So Rothschild 
began to spend astounding sums of money on entertaining them. He hired 
the best architects in France to design his gardens and ballroom; he hired 
Marie-Antoine Careme, the most celebrated French chef, to prepare the 
most lavish parties Paris had ever witnessed; no Frenchman could resist, 
even if the parties were given by a German Jew. Rothschild’s weekly 
soirees began to attract bigger and bigger numbers. Over the next few 
years he won the only thing that would secure an outsider’s power: social 
acceptance. 

Interpretation 

Strategic generosity is always a great weapon in building a support base, 
particularly for the outsider. But the Baron de Rothschild was cleverer still: 
He knew it was his money that had created the barrier between him and 
the French, making him look ugly and untrustworthy. The best way to 
overcome this was literally to waste huge sums, a gesture to show he valued 
French culture and society over money. What Rothschild did resembled 
the famous potlatch feasts of the American Northwest: By periodically de¬ 
stroying its wealth in a giant orgy of festivals and bonfires, an Indian tribe 
would symbolize its power over other tribes. The base of its power was not 
money but its ability to spend, and its confidence in a superiority that 
would restore to it all that the potlatch had destroyed. 

In the end, the baron’s soirees reflected his desire to mingle not just in 
France’s business world but in its society. By wasting money on his pot- 
latches, he hoped to demonstrate that his power went beyond money into 
the more precious realm of culture. Rothschild may have won social accep¬ 
tance by spending money, but the support base he gained was one that 
money alone could not buy. To secure his fortune he had to “waste” it. That 
is strategic generosity in a nutshell—the ability to be flexible with your 
wealth, putting it to work, not to buy objects, but to win people’s hearts. 

Observance III 

The Medicis of Renaissance Florence had built their immense power on 
the fortune they had made in banking. But in Florence, centuries-old re¬ 
public that it was, the idea that money bought power went against all the 
city’s proud democratic values. Cosimo de’ Medici, the first of the family to 
gain great fame, worked around this by keeping a low profile. He never 
flaunted his wealth. But by die time his grandson Lorenzo came of age, in 
the 1470s, the family’s wealth was too large, and their influence too notice¬ 
able, to be disguised any longer. 

Lorenzo solved the problem in his own way by developing the strat¬ 
egy of distraction that has served people of wealth ever since: He became 


THE FLAME-COLORED 
CLOAK 

During the campaign 
of Cambyses in Egypt, 
a great many Greeks 
visited that country for 
one reason or another: 
some, as was to be 
expected, for trade, 
some to serve in the 
army, others, no doubt, 
out of mere curiosity, to 
see what they could see. 
Amongst the sightseers 
was Aeaces’s son Sylo- 
son, the exiled brother 
of Poly crates of Samos. 
While he was in Egypt, 
Syloson had an extra¬ 
ordinary stroke of luck: 
he was hanging about 
the streets of Memphis 
dressed in a flame- 
colored cloak, when 
Darius, who at that 
time was a member of 
Cambyses's guard and 
not yet of any particu¬ 
lar importance, 
happened to catch 
sight of him and, seized 
with a sudden longing 
to possess the cloak, 
came up to Syloson 
and made him an offer 
for it. 

His extreme anxiety to 
get it was obvious 
enough to Syloson, 
who was inspired to 
say: “I am not selling 
this for any money, but 
if you must have it, / 
will give it to you for 
free. ” Darius thereupon 
thanked him warmly 
and took it. Syloson at 
the moment merely 
thought he had lost ii 
by his foolish good 
nature; then came the. 
death of Cambyses and 
the revolt of the seven 
against the Magus, and 
Darius ascended the 
throne. Syloson now 

LAW 40 ; 341 



had the. news that the 
man whose request for 
the flame-colored cloak 
he had formerly grati¬ 
fied in Egypt had 
become king of Persia. 
He hurried to Susa, sat 
down at the entrance of 
the royal palace , and 
claimed to be included 
in the official list of the 
king's benefactors. The 
sentry on guard 
reported his claim to 
Darius, who asked in 
surprise who the man 
might be. “For surely 
he said, "as l have so 
recently come to the 
throne , there cannot be. 
any Greek to whom / 
am indebted for a 
service. Hardly any of 
them have been here 
yet, and ! certainly 
cannot remember 
owing anything to a 
Greek. But bring him 
in all the same, that / 
may know what he 
means by this claim. ” 
The guard escorted 
Syloson into the royal 
presence, and when the 
interpreters asked him 
who he was and what 
he had done to justify 
(he statement that he 
was the king's benefac¬ 
tor, he reminded 
Darius of the story of 
the cloak , and said that 
he was the num who 
had given it him. 
‘'Sir,' 1 exclaimed 
Darius, "you are the 
most generous of m en; 

for while I w as still a 
person of no power or 
consequence you gave 
me a present—small 
indeed, but deserving 
then as much gratitude, 
from me. as would the 
most splendid of gifts 
today. 1 will give you in 
return more silver and 
gold than you can 
count, that you may 


the most illustrious patron of the arts that history has ever known. Not only 
did he spend lavishly on paintings, he created Italy’s finest apprentice 
schools for young artiste. It was in one of these schools that the young 
Michelangelo first caught the attention of Lorenzo, who invited the artist to 
come and live in his house. He did the same with Leonardo da Vinci. Once 
under his wing, Michelangelo and Leonardo requited his generosity by be¬ 
coming loyal artists in his stable. 

Whenever Lorenzo faced an enemy, he would wield the weapon of 
patronage. When Pisa, Florence’s traditional enemy, threatened to rebel 
against it in 1472, Lorenzo placated its people by pouring money into its 
university, which had once been its pride and joy but had long ago lost its 
luster. The Pisans had no defense against this insidious maneuver, which si¬ 
multaneously fed their love of culture and blunted their desire for battle. 
Interpretation 

Lorenzo undoubtedly loved the arte, but his patronage of artiste had a prac¬ 
tical function as well, of which he was keenly aware. In Florence at the 
time, banking was perhaps the least admired way of making money, and 
was certainly not a respected source of power. The arts were at the other 
pole, the pole of quasi-religious transcendence. By spending on the arts, 
Lorenzo diluted people’s opinions of the ugly source of his wealth, disguis¬ 
ing himself in nobility. There is no better use of strategic generosity than 
that of distracting attention from an unsavory reality and wrapping oneself 
in the mantle of art or religion. 

Observance IV 

Louis XIV had an eagle eye for the strategic power of money. When he 
came to the throne, the powerful nobility had recently proven a thorn in 
the monarchy’s side, and seethed with rebelliousness. So he impoverished 
these aristocrats by making them spend enormous sums on maintaining 
their position in the court. Making them dependent on royal largesse for 
their livelihood, he had them in his claws. 

Next Louis brought the nobles to their knees with strategic generosity. 
It would work like this: Whenever he noticed a stubborn courtier whose in¬ 
fluence he needed to gain, or whose troublemaking he needed to squelch, 
he would use his vast wealth to soften the soil. First he would ignore his vic¬ 
tim, making the man anxious. Then the man would suddenly find that his 
son had been given a well-paid post, or that funds had been spent liberally 
in his home region, or that he had been given a painting he had long cov¬ 
eted. Presents would flow from Louis’s hands. Finally, weeks or months 
later, Louis would ask for the favor he had needed all along. A man who 
had once vowed to do anything to stop the king would find he had lost the 
desire to fight. A straightforward bribe would have made him rebellious; 
this was far more insidious. Facing hardened earth in which nothing could 
take root, Louis loosened the soil before he planted his seeds. 
Interpretation 

Louis understood that there is a deep-rooted emotional element in our atti¬ 
tude to money, an element going back to childhood. When we are chil- 


342 LAW 40 



dren, all kinds of complicated feelings about our parents center around 
gifts; we see the giving of a gift as a sign of love and approval. And that 
emotional element never goes away. The recipients of gifts, financial or 
otherwise, are suddenly as vulnerable as children, especially when the gift 
comes from someone in authority. They cannot help opening up; their will 
is loosened, as Louis loosened the soil. 

To succeed best, the gift should come out of the blue. It should be re¬ 
markable for the fact that a gift like it has never been given before, or for 
being preceded by a cold shoulder from the giver. The more often you give 
to particular people, the blunter this weapon becomes. If they don’t take 
your gifts for granted, becoming monsters of ingratitude, they will resent 
what appears to be charity. The sudden, unexpected, one-time gift will not 
spoil your children; it will keep them under your thumb. 

Observance V 

The antique dealer Fushimiya, who lived in the city of Edo {former name 
for Tokyo) in the seventeenth century, once made a stop at a village tea¬ 
house, After enjoying a cup of tea, he spent several minutes scrutinizing the 
cup, which he eventually paid for and took away with him. A local artisan, 
watching this, waited until Fushimiya left the shop, then approached the old 
woman who owned the teahouse and asked her who this man was. She told 
him it was Japan’s most famous connoisseur, antique dealer to the lord of 
Izumo. The artisan ran out of the shop, caught up with Fushimiya, and 
begged him to sell him the cup, which must dearly be valuable if Fushimiya 
judged it so. Fushimiya laughed heartily: “It’s just an ordinary cup of Bizen 
ware,” he explained, “and it is not valuable at all. The reason I was looking 
at it was that the steam seemed to hang about it strangely and I wondered if 
there wasn’t a leak somewhere.” (Devotees of the Tea Ceremony were in¬ 
terested in any odd or accidental beauty in nature.) Since the artisan still 
seemed so excited about it, Fushimiya gave him the cup for free. 

The artisan took the cup around, trying to find an expert who would 
appraise it at a high price, but since all of them recognized it as an ordinary 
teacup he got nowhere. Soon he was neglecting his own business, thinking 
only of the cup and the fortune it could bring. Finally he went to Edo to 
talk to Fushimiya at his shop. There the dealer, realizing that he had inad¬ 
vertently caused this man pain by making him believe the cup had great 
worth, paid him 100 ryo (gold pieces) for the cup as a kindness. The cup 
was indeed mediocre, but he wanted to rid the artisan of his obsession, 
while also allowing him to feel that his effort had not been wasted. The ar¬ 
tisan thanked him and went on his way. 

Soon word spread of Fushimiya’s purchase of the teacup. Every dealer 
in Japan clamored for him to sell it, since a cup he had bought for 100 ryo 
must be worth much more. He tried to explain the circumstances in which 
he had bought the cup, but the dealers could not be dissuaded. Fushimiya 
finally relented and put the cup up for sale. 

During the auction, two buyers simultaneously bid 200 ryo for the 
teacup, and then began to fight over who had bid first. Their fighting 


never regret that you 
once did a favor to 
Darius the son of 
fiystaspes.” ‘'My lord,” 
replied Syloson, “do 
not give me gold or 
silver hut recover 
Samos for me, my 
native, island, which 
now since Oroetes 
killed my brother Poly- 
crates is in the hands 
of one of our servants. 
Let Samos be your gift 
to me—but let no man 
in the island be killed 
or enslaved -" 

Darius consented to 
Syloson's request, and 
dispatched a force 
under the command 
of Otones, one. of the 
seven, with orders to do 
everything that Syloson 
had asked. 

THE HISTORIES, 

Herodotus, 

FIFTH CENTURY R.C. 


Money is never spent to 
so much advantage as 
when you have been 
cheated out of it; for at 
one stroke you have 
purchased prudence. 

Arthur 

Schopenhauer, 

178B-1860 


LAW 40 


343 




A <;IPT OF I I SI I 

Kung yi Hsiu , premier 
o f Lu, was fond of fish. 
Therefore , people in 
the whole country 
conscientiously bought 
fish, which they 
presented to him . 
However, Kung-yi 
would not accept the 
presents. Against such a 
step his younger 
brother remonstrated 
with him and said: 
“You like fish, indeed. 
Why don 7 you accept 
the present offish? ’* In 
reply, he said: "It is 
solely because I like 
fish that / would riot 
accept the fish they 
gave me. 
Indeed , if l accept the 
fish, I will be placed 
under an obligation to 
them. Once placed 
under an obligation to 
them, / will some time 
have to bend the law. If 
l bend the law, / will be 
dismissed from the 
premiership. After 
being dismissed from 
the premiership, / 
might not be able to 
supply myself with fish. 
On (he contrary , if i do 
not accept the fish from 
them and am not 
dismissed the premier¬ 
ship, however fond of 
fish, / can always 

supply myself 
with fish." 

Han-fei-t?.u. 
Chinese philosopher, 

THIRD CENTURY B.C. 


tipped over a table and the teacup fell to the ground and broke into several 
pieces. The auction was clearly over. Fushimiya glued and mended the 
cup, then stored it away, thinking the affair finished. Years later, however, 
the great tea master Matsudaira Fumai visited the store, and asked to see 
the cup, which by then had become legendary. Fumai examined it. w As a 
piece,” he said, “it is not up to much, but a Tea Master prizes sentiment and 
association more than intrinsic value.” He bought the cup for a high sum. 
A glued-together work of less than ordinary craftsmanship had become 
one of the most famous objects in Japan. 

Interpretation 

The story shows, first, an essential aspect of money: That it is humans who 
have created it and humans who instill it with meaning and value. Second, 
with objects as with money, what the courtier most values are the senti¬ 
ments and emotions embedded in them—these are what make them worth 
having. The lesson is simple: The more your gifts and your acts of generos¬ 
ity play with sentiment, the more powerful they are. The object or concept 
that plays with a charged emotion or hits a chord of sentiment has more 
power than the money you squander on an expensive yet lifeless present. 

Observance VI 

Akimoto Suzutomo, a wealthy adherent of the tea ceremony, once gave his 
page 100 ryo (gold pieces) and instructed him to purchase a tea bowl of¬ 
fered by a particular dealer. When the page saw the bowl, he doubted it 
was worth that much, and after much bargaining got the price reduced to 
95 ryo. Days later, after Suzutomo had put the bowl to use, the page 
proudly told him what he had done. 

“What an ignoramus you are!” replied Suzutomo. “A tea bowl that 
anyone asks 100 pieces of gold for can only be a family heirloom, and a 
thing like that is only sold when the family is pressed for money. And in 
that case they will be hoping to find someone who will give even 150 
pieces for it. So what sort of fellow is it who does not consider their feel¬ 
ings? Quite apart from that, a curio that you give 100 ryo for is something 
worth having, but one that has only cost 95 gives a mean impression. So 
never let me see that tea bowl again!” And he had the bowl locked away, 
and never took it out. 

Interpretation 

When you insist on paying less, you may save your five ryo, but the insult 
you cause and the cheap impression you create will cost you in reputation, 
which is the thing the powerful prize above all. Learn to pay the full 
price—it will save you a lot in the end. 

Observance VII 

Sometime near the beginning of the seventeenth century in Japan, a group 
of generals whiled away the time before a big battle by staging an incense¬ 
smelling competition. Each participant anted up a prize for the contest’s 
winners—bows, arrows, saddles, and other items a warrior would covet. 


344 


LAW 40 



The great Lord Date Masamune happened to pass by and was induced to 
participate. For a prize, he offered the gourd that hung from his belt. Every¬ 
one laughed, for no one wanted to win this cheap item. A retainer of the 
host finally accepted the gourd. 

When the party broke up, however, and the generals were chatting 
outside the tent, Masamune brought over his magnificent horse and gave it 
to the retainer. “There,” he said, “a horse has come out of the gourd.” The 
stunned generals suddenly regretted their scorn at Masamune’s gift. 
Interpretation 

Masamune understood the following: Money gives its possessor the ability 
to give pleasure to others. The more you can do this, the more you attract 
admiration. When you make a horse come out of a gourd, you give the ul¬ 
timate demonstration of your power. 


Image: The River. To protect 
yourself or to save the resource, 
you dam it up. Soon, however, 
the waters become dank and 
pestilent. Only the foulest 
forms of life can live in such 
stagnant waters; nothing trav¬ 
els on them, all commerce 
stops. Destroy the dam. When 
water ilows and circulates, it gen 
erates abundance, wealth, and 
power in ever larger circles. The 
River must flood periodically 
for good things to flourish. 


/ took money only 
from those who could 
afford it and were will- 
ing to go in with me in 
schemes they fancied 
would fleece others. 
They wanted money 
for its own sake. 1 
wanted it for the luxu¬ 
ries and pleasures it 
would afford me. They 
were seldom concerned 
with human nature. 
They knew little—and 
cared less—about their 
fellow men. if they had 
been keener students of 
human nature , if they 
had given more time to 
companionship with 
their fellows and less to 
the chase of the 
almighty dollar, they 
wouldn't have been 
such easy marks. 

“Yellow kid" Wen.. 
1875-3976 


Authority: The great man who is a miser is a great fool, and a man in 
high places can have no vice so har mful as avarice. A miserly man can 
conquer neither lands nor lordships, for he does not have a plentiful 
supply of friends with whom he may work his will. Whoever wants to 
have friends must not love his possessions but must acquire friends by 
means of fair gifts; for in the same way that the lodestone subtly draws 
iron to itself, so the gold and silver that a man gives attract the hearts 
of men. {The Romance of the Rose , Guillaume de Lords, c. 1200-1238) 


345 


LAW 40 



REVERSAL 

The powerful never forget that what is offered for free is inevitably a trick. 
Friends who offer favors without asking for payment will later want some¬ 
thing far dearer than the money you would have paid them. The bargain 
has hidden problems, both material and psychological. Learn to pay, then, 
and to pay well. 

On die other hand, this Law offers great opportunities for swindling 
and deception if you apply it from the other side. Dangling the lure of a 
free lunch is the con artist’s stock in trade. 

No man was better at this than the most successful con artist of our 
age, Joseph Weil, a.k.a. “The Yellow Kid.” The Yellow Kid learned early 
that what made his swindles possible was his fellow humans’ greed. “This 
desire to get something for nothing,” he once wrote, “has been very costly 
to many people who have dealt widi me and with other con men. . . . 
When people learn—as I doubt they will—that they can’t get something 
for nothing, crime will diminish and we shall all live in greater harmony.” 
Over the years Weil devised many ways to seduce people with the prospect 
of easy money. He would hand out “free” real estate—who could resist 
such an offer?—and then the suckers would learn they had to pay $25 to 
register the sale. Since the land was free, it seemed worth the high fee, and 
the Yellow Kid would make thousands of dollars on the phony registration. 
In exchange he would give his suckers a phony deed. Other times, he 
would tell suckers about a fixed horse race, or a stock that would earn 200 
percent in a few weeks. As he spun his stories he would watch the sucker’s 
eyes open wide at the thought of a free lunch. 

The lesson is simple: Bait your deceptions with the possibility of easy 
money. People are essentially lazy, and want wealth to fall in their lap 
rather than to work for it. For a small sum, sell them advice on how to 
make millions (P. T. Bamum did this later in life), and that small sum will 
become a fortune when multiplied by thousands of suckers. Lure people in 
with the prospect of easy money and you have the room to work still more 
deceptions on them, since greed is powerful enough to blind your victims 
to anything. And as the Yellow Kid said, half the fun is teaching a moral 
lesson: Greed does not pay. 



LAW 


41 

AVOID STEPPING INTO 
A GREAT MAN’S SHOES 

JUDGMENT 

What happens first always appears better and more orig¬ 
inal than what comes after. If you succeed a great man 
or have a famous parent, you will have to accomplish 
double their achievements to outshine them . Do not get 
lost in their shadow, or stuck in a past not of your oion 
making: Establish your own name and identity by 
changing course. Slay the overbearing father, disparage 
his legacy, and gain power by shining in your own way , 



rim kxckm,kni:k 

OK BEING KIKST 

Many would have 
shone like the very 
phoenix in their occu¬ 
pations if others had 
not preceded them. 
Being first is a great 
advantage; with 
eminence , twice as 
good. Deal the first 
hand and you will win 
the upper ground .... 

Those who go first 
win fame by right of 
birth „ and those who 
follow are like second 
sons, contenting them¬ 
selves with meager 
portions .... 
Solomon opted wisely 
for pacifism , yielding 
warlike things to his 
father. By changing 
course he found it 
easier to become a 
hero.... 
And our great Philip II 
governed the entire 
world from the throne 
of his prudence, aston¬ 
ishing the ages. If his 
unconquered father 
was a mode! of energy, 
Philip was a paradigm 
of prudence.... This 
sort of novelty has 
helped the well-advised 
win a place in the roll 
of the great. 
Without leaving their 
own art, the ingenious 
leave the common path 
and take, even in 
professions gray with 
age, new steps toward 
eminence. Horace 
yielded epic poetry to 
Virgil, and Martial the 
lyric to Horace. Terence 
opted for comedy, 
Persius for satire, each 
hoping to he first in his 
genre. Bold fancy never 
succumbed to facile 
imitation. 

A POCKET MIRROR 
FOR HEROES, 

Bau asar Gracian, 
translated by 
Christopher Maurer, 
19 % 

348 


TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

When Louis XrV died, in 1715, after a glorious fifty-five-year reign, all eyes 
focused on his great-grandson and chosen successor, the future Louis XV, 
Would the boy, only five at the time, prove as great a leader as the Sun 
King? Louis XIV had transformed a country on the verge of civil war into 
the preeminent power in Europe. The last years of his reign had been diffi¬ 
cult—he had been old and tired—but it was hoped that the child would de¬ 
velop into the kind of strong ruler who would reinvigorate the land and 
add to the firm foundation that Louis XIV had laid. 

To this end the child was given the best minds of France as his tutors, 
men who would instruct him in the arts of statecraft, in the methods that 
the Sun King had perfected. Nothing was neglected in his education. But 
when Louis XV came to the throne, in 1726, a sudden change came over 
him: He no longer had to study or please others or prove himself. He stood 
alone at the top of a great country, with wealth and power at his command. 
He could do as he wished. 

In the first years of his reign, Louis gave himself over to pleasure, leav¬ 
ing the government in the hands of a trusted minister, Andre-Hercule de 
Fleury. This caused little concern, for he was a young man who needed to 
sow his wild oats, and de Fleury was a good minister. But it slowly became 
clear that this was more than a passing phase, Louis had no interest in gov¬ 
erning. His main worry was not France’s finances, or a possible war with 
Spain, but boredom. He could not stand being bored, and when he was not 
hunting deer, or chasing young girls, he whiled away his time at the gam¬ 
bling tables, losing huge sums in a single night 

The court, as usual, reflected the tastes of the ruler. Gambling and lav¬ 
ish parties became the obsession. The courtiers had no concern with the fu¬ 
ture of France—they poured their energies into charming the king, angling 
for titles that would bring them life pensions, and for cabinet positions de¬ 
manding little work but paying huge salaries. Parasites flocked to the court, 
and the state’s debts swelled. 

In 1745 Louis fell in love with Madame de Pompadour, a woman of 
middle-class origin who had managed to rise through her charms, her intel¬ 
ligence, and a good marriage. Madame de Pompadour became the official 
royal mistress; she also became France’s arbiter of taste and fashion. But 
the Madame had political ambitions as well, and she eventually emerged 
as the country’s unofficial prime minister—it was she, not Louis, who 
wielded hiring-and-firing power over France’s most important ministers. 

As he grew older Louis only needed more diversion. On the grounds 
of Versailles he built a brothel, Parc aux Cerfs, which housed some of the 
prettiest young girls of France. Underground passages and hidden stair¬ 
cases gave Louis access at all hours. After Madame de Pompadour died, in 
1764, she was succeeded as royal mistress by Madame du Barry, who soon 
came to dominate the court, and who, like de Pompadour before her, 
began to meddle in affairs of state. If a minister did not please her he would 
find himself fired. All of Europe was aghast when du Barry, the daughter of 
a baker, managed to arrange the firing of Etienne de Choiseul, the foreign 


LAW 41 




minister and France’s most able diplomat. He had shown her too little re¬ 
spect. As time went by, swindlers and charlatans made their nests in Ver¬ 
sailles, and enticed Louis’s interest in astrology, the occult, and fraudulent 
business deals. Tire young and pampered teenager who had taken over 
France years before had only grown worse with age. 

The motto that became attached to Louis’s reign was "Apres moi, le 
deluge "—“After me the flood,” or, Let France rot after I am gone. And in¬ 
deed when Louis did go, in 1774, worn out by debauchery, his country' and 
his own finances were in horrible disarray. His grandson Louis XVI inher¬ 
ited a realm in desperate need of reform and a strong leader. But Louis 
XVI was even weaker than his grandfather, and could only watch as the 
country descended into revolution. In 1792 the republic introduced by die 
French Revolution declared the end of the monarchy, and gave the king a 
new name, “Louis the Last” A few months later he kneeled on the guillo¬ 
tine, his about-to-be-severed head stripped of all the radiance and power 
that the Sun King had invested in the crown. 

Interpretation 

From a country that had descended into dvil war in the late 1640s, Louis 
XIV forged the mightiest realm in Europe. Great generals would tremble 
in his presence. A cook once made a mistake in preparing a dish and com¬ 
mitted suicide rather than face the king’s wrath. Louis XIV had many mis¬ 
tresses, but their power ended in the bedroom. He filled his court with the 
most brilliant minds of the age. The symbol of his power was Versailles: 
Refusing to accept the palace of his forefathers, the Louvre, he built his 
own palace in what was then the middle of nowhere, symbolizing that this 
was a new order he had founded, one without precedent He made Ver¬ 
sailles the centerpiece of his reign, a place that all the powerful of Europe 
envied and visited with a sense of awe. In essence, Louis took a great 
void—the decaying monarchy of France—and filled it with his own sym¬ 
bols and radiant power. 

Louis XV, on the other hand, symbolizes the fate of all those who in¬ 
herit something large or who follow in a great man’s footsteps. It would 
seem easy for a son or successor to build on the grand foundation left for 
them, but in the realm of power the opposite is true. The pampered, in¬ 
dulged son almost always squanders the inheritance, for he does not start 
with the father’s need to fill a void. As Machiavetti states, necessity is what 
impels men to take action, and once the necessity is gone, only rot and 
decay are left. Having no need to increase his store of power, Louis XV in¬ 
evitably succumbed to inertia. Under him, Versailles, the symbol of the 
Sun King’s authority, became a pleasure palace of incomparable banality, 
a kind of Las Vegas of the Bourbon monarchy. It came to represent all that 
the oppressed peasantry of France hated about their king, and during the 
Revolution they looted it with glee. 

Louis XV had only one way out of the trap awaiting the son or succes¬ 
sor of a man like the Sun King: to psychologically begin from nothing, to 


LIFE OF PERICLES 

As a young man Peri- 
cles was inclined to 
shrink from facing the 
people. One reason for 
this was that he was 
considered to hear a 
distinct resemblance to 
the tyrant Pisistratus, 
and when men who 
were well on in years 
remarked on the charm 
of Pericles' voice and 
the smoothness and 
fluency of his speech, 
they were astonished at 
the resemblance 
between the two. The 
fact that he was rich 
and that he came of a 
distinguished family 
and possessed exceed¬ 
ingly powerful friends 
made the. fear of 
ostracism very real to 
him, and at the begin¬ 
ning o f his career he 
took no pan in politics 
but devoted himself to 
soldiering, in which he 
showed great daring 
and enterprise. 

However ., the time came 
when Aristides was 
dead, Themistocles in 
exile, and Cimon 
frequently absent on 
distant campaigns. 

Then at last Pericles 
decided to attach 
himself to the people's 
party and to take, up 
the cause of the poor 
and the many instead 
of that of the rich and 
the few, in spite of the 
fact that this was quite 
contrary to his own 
temperament, which 
was thoroughly aristo¬ 
cratic. He was afraid, 
apparently, of being 
suspected of aiming at 
a dictatorship; so that 
when he saw that 


LAW 41 849 



C'imon s sympathies 
were strongly with the 
nohtes anti that Cimon 
was the idol of the aris¬ 
tocratic party, Pericles 
began to ingratiate 
himself with the people, 
partly for self-preserva¬ 
tion and partly by miy 
of securing power 
against his rival. 
He now entered upon 
a new mode of life. 
He was never to be 
seen walking in any 
street except the one 
which led to the 
market-place and the 
council chamber. 
THE LIFE OF PERICLES. 

Plutarch, 
c. A.n. 46-120 


TIIK Mi l* OK IMKTRO 
PKRCOINO. I’AIYI KK. 
r. nno-i’2:i 

How beneficial poverty 
may sometimes be to 
(hose with talent, and 
how it may serve as a 
powerful goad to make 
them perfect or excel¬ 
lent in whatever occu¬ 
pation they might 
choose, can be seen 
very clearly in the 
actions of Pietro 
Perugino. Wishing by 
means of his ability to 
attain some respectable 
rank, after leaving 
disastrous calamities 
behind in Perugia and 
coming to Florence, he 
remained (here many 
months in poverty, 
sleeping in a chest, 
since he had no other 
bed; he turned night 
into day, and with the 
greatest zeal continu¬ 
ally applied himself to 


denigrate the past and his inheritance, and to move in a totally new direc¬ 
tion, creating his own world. Assuming you have the choice, it would be 
better to avoid the situation altogether, to place yourself where there is a 
vacuum of power, where you can be the one to bring order out of chaos 
without having to compete with another star in the sky. Power depends on 
appearing larger than other people, and when you are lost in the shadow of 
the father, the king, the great predecessor, you cannot possibly project such 
a presence. 

But when they began to make sovereignty hereditary, the children quickly 
degenerated from their fathers; and, so far from trying to equal their father's 
virtues, they considered that a prince had nothing else to do than to excel 
all the rest in idleness , indulgence, and every other variety of pleasure. 

Niccola MachiavellL 1469- 1527 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

Alexander the Great had a dominant passion as a young man—an intense 
dislike for his father, King Philip of Macedonia. He hated Philip’s cunning, 
cautious style of ruling, his bombastic speeches, his drinking and whoring, 
and his love of wrestling and of other wastes of time. Alexander knew he 
had to make himself the very opposite of his domineering father: He would 
force himself to be bold and reckless, he would control his tongue and be a 
man of few words, and he would not lose precious time in pursuit of plea¬ 
sures that brought no glory. Alexander also resented the fact that Philip 
had conquered most of Greece: “My father will go on conquering till there 
is nothing extraordinary left for me to do,” he once complained. While 
other sons of powerful men were content to inherit wealth and live a life of 
leisure, Alexander wanted only to outdo his father, to obliterate Philip’s 
name from history by surpassing his accomplishments. 

Alexander itched to show others how superior he was to his father. A 
Thessalian horse-dealer once brought a prize horse named Bucephalus to 
sell to Philip. None of the king’s grooms could get near the horse—it was 
far too savage—and Philip berated the merchant for bringing him such a 
useless beast. Watching the whole affair, Alexander scowled and com¬ 
mented, “What a horse they are losing for want of skill and spirit to man¬ 
age him!” When he had said this several times, Philip had finally had 
enough, and challenged him to take on the horse. He called the merchant 
back, secretly hoping his son would have a nasty fall and learn a bitter les¬ 
son. But Alexander was the one to teach the lesson: Not only did he mount 
Bucephalus, he managed to ride him at full gallop, taming the horse that 
would later carry him all the way to India. The courtiers applauded wildly, 
but Philip seethed inside, seeing not a son but a rival to his power. 

Alexander’s defiance of his father grew bolder. One day the two men 
had a heated argument before the entire court, and Philip drew his sword 
as if to strike his son; having drunk too much wine, however, the king 
stumbled. Alexander pointed at his father and jeered, “Men of Macedonia, 


350 LAW 41 



see there the man who is preparing to pass from Europe to Asia. He cannot 
pass from one table to another without falling.” 

When Alexander was eighteen, a disgruntled courtier murdered 
Philip. As word of the regicide spread through Greece, city after city rose 
up in rebellion against their Macedonian rulers. Philip’s advisers counseled 
Alexander, now the king, to proceed cautiously, to do as Philip had done 
and conquer through cunning. But Alexander would do things his way: He 
marched to the jfurthest reaches of the kingdom, suppressed the rebellious 
towns, and reunited the empire with brutal efficiency. 

As a young rebel grows older, his struggle against die father often 
wanes, and he gradually comes to resemble the very man he had wanted to 
defy. But Alexander’s loathing of his father did not end with Philip’s death. 
Once he had consolidated Greece, he set his eyes on Persia, the prize that 
had eluded his father, who had dreamed of conquering Asia. If he defeated 
th e Persians, Alexander would finally surpass Philip in glory and fame. 

Alexander crossed into Asia with an army of 35,000 to face a Persian 
force numbering over a million. Before engaging the Persians in battle he 
passed through the town of Gordium. Here, in the town’s main temple, 
there stood an ancient chariot tied with cords made of the rind of the cor¬ 
nel tree. Legend had it that any man who could undo these cords—the 
Gordian knot—would rule the world. Many had tried to untie the enor¬ 
mous and intricate knot, but none had succeeded. Alexander, seeing he 
could not possibly untie the knot with his bare hands, took out his sword 
and with one slash cut it in half. This symbolic gesture showed the world 
that he would not do as others, but would blaze his own path. 

Against astounding odds, Alexander conquered the Persians. Most ex¬ 
pected him to stop there—it was a great triumph, enough to secure his 
fame for eternity. But Alexander had the same relationship to his own 
deeds as he had to his father: His conquest of Persia represented the past, 
and he wanted never to rest on past triumphs, or to allow the past to out¬ 
shine the present. He moved on to India, extending his empire beyond all 
known limits. Only his disgruntled and weary soldiers prevented him from 
going farther. 

Interpretation 

Alexander represents an extremely uncommon type in history: the son of 
a famous and successful man who manages to surpass the father in glory 
and power. The reason this type is uncommon is simple: The father most 
often manages to amass his fortune, his kingdom, because he begins with 
little or nothing. A desperate urge impels him to succeed—he has nothing 
to lose by cunning and impetuousness, and has no famous father of his 
own to compete against. This kind of man has reason to believe in 
himself—to believe that his way of doing things is the best, because, after 
all, it worked for him. 

When a man like this has a son, he becomes domineering and oppres¬ 
sive, imposing his lessons on the son, who is starting off life in circum¬ 
stances totally different from those in which the father himself began. 


the study of his profes¬ 
sion. A fter painting had 
become second nature 
to him, Pietro's only 
pleasure was always to 
be working in his craft 
and constantly to be 
painting. And became 
he always had the 
dread of poverty before 
his eyes, he did things 
to make money which 
he probably would not 
have bothered to do 
had. he not been forced 
to support himself. 
Perhaps wealth would 
have closed to him and 
his talent the path to 
excellence fust as 
poverty had opened it 
up to him, hut need 
spurred him on since he 
desired to rise from 
such a miserable and 
lowly position—if not 
perhaps to the summit 
and supreme height of 
excellence, then at least 
to a point where he. 
could have enough to 
live on. For this reason , 
he took no notice of 
cold, hunger, discom¬ 
fort, inconvenience, toil 
or shame if he could 
only live one day in 
ease and repose; and he 
would always say—and 
as if it were a proverb — 
that after bad weather, 
good weather must 
follow, and that during 
the good weather 
houses must be built for 
shelter in times o f need. 
LIVES OF THE ARTISTS. 

Giorgio Vasari, 

1511—1574 


LAW 41 


351 




THK PKOBLKM OK 
PA I !. MORPHY 

The slightest acquaint 
lance with chess shows 
one that it is a play* 
substitute for the art of 
war and indeed it has 
been a favorite recre¬ 
ation of some of the 
greatest military lead¬ 
ers, from William the 
Conqueror to 
Napoleon, 
in the contest between 
the opposing armies 
the same principles of 
both strategy and tactics 
are displayed as in 
actual war, (he same 
foresight and powers of 
calculation are neces¬ 
sary. the same capacity 
for divining the plans 
of the opponent, and 
the rigor wish which 
decisions are followed 
by their consequences 
is, if anything, even 
more ruthless. More 
than that, it is plain that 
the unconscious motive 
actuating the players is 
not the mere love of 
pugnacity characteristic 
of all competitive 
games, but the grimmer 
one 0 /father-murder. 
It is true that the origi¬ 
nal goal of capturing 
the king has been given 
up, but from the point 
of view of motive there 
is, except in respect of 
crudity , not appreciable 
change in the present 
goal of sterilizing him 
in immobility.... 
"Checkmate " means 
literally “the king is 
dead. ” 

... Our knowledge of 
the unconscious moti¬ 
vation of chess-playing 
tells us that what it 
represented could only 
have been the wish to 
overcome the father in 
an acceptable way ..,. 
It is no doubt signifi- 

352 : LAW 41 


Instead of allowing the son to go in a new direction, the father will try to 
put him in his own shoes, perhaps secretly wishing the boy will fail, as 
Philip half wanted to see Alexander thrown from Bucephalus. Fathers envy 
their sons’ youth and vigor, after all, and their desire is to control and dom¬ 
inate. The sons of such men tend to become cowed and cautious, terrified 
of losing what their fathers have gained. 

The son will never step out of his father’s shadow unless he adopts the 
ruthless strategy of Alexander: disparage the past, create your own king¬ 
dom, put the father in the shadows instead of letting him do the same to 
you. If you cannot materially start from ground zero—it would be foolish 
to renounce an inheritance—you can at least begin from ground zero psy¬ 
chologically, by throwing off the weight of the past and charting a new di¬ 
rection. Alexander instinctively recognized that privileges of birth are 
impediments to power. Be merciless with the past, then—not only with 
your father and his father but with your own earlier achievements. Only 
the weak rest on their laurels and dote on past triumphs; in the game of 
power there is never time to rest 


KEYS TO POWER 

In many ancient kingdoms, for example Bengal and Sumatra, after the 
king had ruled for several years his subjects would execute him. This was 
done partly as a ritual of renewal, but also to prevent him from growing too 
powerful—for the king would generally try to establish a permanent order, 
at the expense of other families and of his own sons. Instead of protecting 
the tribe and leading it in times of war, he would attempt to dominate it. 
And so he would be beaten to death, or executed in an elaborate ritual. 
Now that he was no longer around for his honors to go to his head, he 
could be worshipped as a god. Meanwhile the field had been cleared for a 
new and youthful order to establish itself. 

The ambivalent, hostile attitude towards the king or father figure also 
finds expression in legends of heroes who do not know their father. Moses, 
the archetypal man of power, w'as found abandoned among the bulrushes 
and never knew his parents; without a father to compete with him or limit 
him, he could attain the heights of power. Hercules had no earthly father— 
he was the son of the god Zeus. Later in his life Alexander the Great spread 
the story that the god Jupiter Ammon had sired him, not Philip of Mace- 
don. Legends and rituals like these eliminate the human father because he 
symbolizes the destructive power of the past. 

The past prevents the young hero from creating his own world—he 
must do as his father did, even after that father is dead or powerless. The 
hero must bow and scrape before his predecessor and yield to tradition 
and precedent. What had success in the past must be carried over to the 
present, even though circumstances have greatly changed. The past also 
weighs the hero down with an inheritance that he is terrified of losing, 
making him timid and cautious. 

Power depends on the ability to fill a void, to occupy a field that has 



been cleared of the dead weight of the past. Only after the father figure has 
been properly done away with will you have the necessary space to create 
and establish a new order. There are several strategies you can adopt to ac¬ 
complish this—variations on the execution of the king that disguise the vio¬ 
lence of the impulse by channeling it in socially acceptable forms. 

Perhaps the simplest way to escape the shadow of the past is simply to 
belittle it, playing on the timeless antagonism between the generations, stir¬ 
ring up the young against the old. For this you need a convenient older fig¬ 
ure to pillory. Mao Tse-tung, confronting a culture that fiercely resisted 
change, played on the suppressed resentment against the overbearing pres¬ 
ence of the venerable Confucius in Chinese culture, John F, Kennedy 
knew the dangers of getting lost in the past; he radically distinguished his 
presidency from that of his predecessor, Dwight D. Eisenhower, and also 
from die preceding decade, the 1950s, which Eisenhower personified. 
Kennedy, for instance, would not play the dull and fatherly game of golf— 
a symbol of retirement and privilege, and Eisenhowers passion. Instead he 
played football on the White House lawn. In every aspect his administra¬ 
tion represented vigor and youth, as opposed to the stodgy Eisenhower. 
Kennedy had discovered an old truth: The young are easily set against the 
old, since they yearn to make their own place in the world and resent the 
shadow of their fathers. 

The distance you establish from your predecessor often demands 
some symbolism, a way of advertising itself publicly. Louis XIV, for exam¬ 
ple, created such symbolism when he rejected the traditional palace of the 
French kings and built his own palace of Versailles. King Philip II of Spain 
did the same when he created his center of power, the palace of El Esco- 
rial, in what was then the middle of nowhere. But Louis carried the game 
further: He would not be a king like his father or earlier ancestors, he 
would not wear a crown or carry a scepter or sit on a throne, he would es¬ 
tablish a new kind of imposing authority with symbols and rituals of its 
own. Louis made his ancestors’ rituals into laughable relics of the past. Fol¬ 
low his example: Never let yourself be seen as following your predeces¬ 
sor’s path. If you do you will never surpass him. You must physically 
demonstrate your difference, by establishing a style and symbolism that 
sets you apart. 

The Roman emperor Augustus, successor to Julius Caesar, understood 
this thoroughly. Caesar had been a great general, a theatrical figure whose 
spectacles kept the Romans entertained, an international emissary seduced 
by the charms of Cleopatra-—a larger-than-life figure. So Augustus, despite 
his own theatrical tendencies, competed with Caesar not by trying to outdo 
him but by differentiating himself from him: He based his power on a re¬ 
turn to Roman simplicity, an austerity of both style and substance. Against 
the memory of Caesar’s sweeping presence Augustus posed a quiet and 
manly dignity. 

The problem with the overbearing predecessor is that he fills the vistas 
before you with symbols of the past. You have no room to create your own 
name. To deal with this situation you need to hunt out the vacuums—those 


cant that [nineteenth- 
century chess cham¬ 
pion Paul / Morphy's 
soaring odyssey into 
the higher realms of 
chess began just a year 
after the unexpectedly 
sudden death of his 
father, which had been 
a great shock to him , 
and we may surmise 
that his brilliant effort 
of sublimation wa s. like 
Shakespeare’s Hamlet 
and Freud's The Inter¬ 
pretation of Dreams, a 
reaction to this critical 
event .... 

Something should now 
be said about, the recep¬ 
tion Morphy's 
successes met with, for 
they were of such a 
kind as to raise the. 
question whether his 
subsequent collapse 
may not have been 
influenced through his 
perhaps belonging to 
the type that Freud has 
described under the 
name of ID ie am 
Erfoige seheitern 
(“Those wrecked by 
success").... Couched 
in more psychological 
language . was Morphy 
affrighted at his own 
presumptuousness 
when the light of 
publicity was thrown 
on [his great success ?J 
Freud, has pointed out 
that the people who 
break under the strain 
of too great success do 
so became, they can 
endure it only in imagi¬ 
nation, not in reality . To 
castrate the father in a 
dream is a very differ¬ 
ent matter from doing 
it in reality. The real 
situation provokes the 
unconscious guilt in its 
full force, and the 
penalty may be mental 
collapse. 

THE PROBLEM OF PAUL 
MORPHY, 

Ernest Jones. 

1951 


LAW 41 


353 



areas in culture that have been left vacant and in which you can become 
the first and principal figure to shine. 

When Pericles of Athens was about to launch a career as a statesman, 
he looked for the one thing that was missing in Athenian politics. Most of 
the great politicians of his time had allied themselves with the aristocracy; 
indeed Pericles himself had aristocratic tendencies. Yet he decided to throw 
in his hat with the city’s democratic elements. The choice had nothing to 
do with his personal beliefs, but it launched him on a brilliant career. Out 
of necessity he became a man of the people. Instead of competing in an 
arena filled with great leaders both past and present, he would make a 
name for himself where no shadows could obscure his presence. 

When the painter Diego de Velazquez began his career, he knew he 
could not compete in refinement and technique with the great Renaissance 
painters who had come before him. Instead he chose to work in a style that 
by the standards of the time seemed coarse and rough, in a way that had 
never been seen before. And in this style he excelled. There were mem¬ 
bers of the Spanish court who wanted to demonstrate their own break with 
the past; the newness of Velazquez’s style thrilled them. Most people are 
afraid to break so boldly with tradition, but they secretly admire those who 
can break up the old forms and reinvigorate the culture. This is why there 
is so much power to be gained from entering vacuums and voids. 

There is a kind of stubborn stupidity that recurs throughout history, 
and is a strong impediment to power: The superstitious belief that if the 
person before you succeeded by doing A, B, and C, you can re-create their 
success by doing die same thing. This cookie-cutter approach will seduce 
the uncreative, for it is easy, and appeals to their timidity and their laziness. 
But circumstances never repeat themselves exactly. 

When General Douglas MacArthur assumed command of American 
forces in the Philippines during World War II, an assistant handed him a 
book containing the various precedents established by the commanders 
before him, the methods that had been successful for them. MacArthur 
asked the assistant how many copies there were of this book. Six, the assis¬ 
tant answered. “Well,” the general replied, “you get all those six copies to¬ 
gether and bum them—every one of them. I’ll not be bound by 
precedents. Any time a problem comes up. I’ll make the decision at 
once—immediately.” Adopt this ruthless strategy toward the past: Bum all 
the books, and train yourself to react to circumstances as they happen. 

You may believe that you have separated yourself from the predeces¬ 
sor or father figure, but as you grow older you must be eternally vigilant 
lest you become the father you had rebelled against. As a young man, Mao 
Tse-tung disliked his father and in the struggle against him found his own 
identity and a new set of values. But as he aged, his father’s ways crept back 
in. Mao’s father had valued manual work over intellect; Mao had scoffed at 
this as a young man, but as he grew older he unconsciously returned to his 
father’s views and echoed such outdated ideas by forcing a whole genera¬ 
tion of Chinese intellectuals into manual labor, a nightmarish mistake that 



cost his regime dearly. Remember: You are your own father. Do not let 
yourself spend years creating yourself only to let your guard down and 
allow the ghost of the past—father, habit, history—to sneak back in. 

Finally, as noted in the story of Louis XV, plenitude and prosperity 
tend to make us lazy and inactive: When our power is secure we have no 
need to act. This is a serious danger, especially for those who achieve suc¬ 
cess and power at an early age. The playwright Tennessee Williams, for in¬ 
stance, found himself skyrocketed from obscurity to fame by the success of 
The Glass Menagerie. “The sort of life which I had had previous to this popu¬ 
lar success,” he later wrote, “was one that required endurance, a life of 
clawing and scratching, but it was a good life because it was the sort of life 
for which the human organism is created. I was not aware of how much 
vital energy had gone into this struggle until the struggle was removed. 
This was security at last. I sat down and looked about me and was suddenly 
very depressed.” Williams had a nervous breakdown, which may in fact 
have been necessary for him: Pushed to the psychological edge, he could 
start writing with the old vitality again, and he produced A Streetcar Named 
Desire. Fyodor Dostoyevsky, similarly, whenever he wrote a successful 
novel, would feel that the financial security he had gained made the act of 
creation unnecessary. He would take his entire savings to the casino and 
would not leave until he had gambled away his last penny. Once reduced 
to poverty he could write again. 

It is not necessary to go to such extremes, but you must be prepared to 
return to square one psychologically rather than growing fat and lazy with 
prosperity. Pablo Picasso could deal with success, but only by constantly 
changing the style of his painting, often breaking completely with what 
had made him successful before. How often our early triumphs turn us 
into a kind of caricature of ourselves. Powerful people recognize these 
traps; like Alexander the Great, they struggle constantly to re-create them¬ 
selves. The father must not be allowed to return; he must be slain at every 
step of the way. 


Image: The Father. He casts a 
giant shadow over his children, 
keeping them in thrall long 
after he is gone by tying them 
to the past, squashing their 
youthful spirit, and forcing 
them down the same tired path 
he followed himself. His tricks 
are many. At every cross¬ 
roads you must slay the father 
and step out of his shadow. 



Authority: Beware of stepping into a 
great man’s shoes—you will have to 
accomplish twice as much to surpass 
him. Those who follow are taken for 
imitators. No matter how much they 
sweat, they will never shed that bur 
den. It is an uncommon skill to find a 
new path for excellence, a modern 
route to celebrity. There are many 
roads to singularity, not all of them 
well traveled. The newest ones can be 
arduous, but they are often shortcuts to 
greatness. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658) 


REVERSAL 

The shadow of a great predecessor could be used to advantage if it is cho¬ 
sen as a trick, a tactic that can be discarded once it has brought you power. 
Napoleon III used the name and legend of his illustrious grand-uncle 
Napoleon Bonaparte to help him become first president and then emperor 
of France. Once on the throne, however, he did not stay tied to the past; he 
quickly showed how different his reign would be, and was careful to keep 
the public from expecting him to attain the heights that Bonaparte had at¬ 
tained. 

The past often has elements worth appropriating, qualities that would 
be foolish to reject out of a need to distinguish yourself. Even Alexander 
the Great recognized and was influenced by his father’s skill in organizing 
an army. Making a display of doing things differently from your predeces¬ 
sor can make you seem childish and in fact out of control, unless your ac¬ 
tions have a logic of their own. 

Joseph II, son of the Austrian empress Maria Theresa, made a show of 
doing the exact opposite of his mother—dressing like an ordinary citizen, 
staying in inns instead of palaces, appearing as the “people’s emperor.” 
Maria Theresa, on the other hand, had been regal and aristocratic. The 
problem was that she had also been beloved, an empress who ruled wisely 



after years of learning the hard way. If you have the kind of intelligence 
and instinct that will point you in the right direction, playing the rebel will 
not be dangerous. But if you are mediocre, as Joseph II was in comparison 
to his mother, you are better off learning from your predecessor’s knowl¬ 
edge and experience, which are based on something real. 

Finally, it is often wise to keep an eye on the young, your future rivals 
in power. Just as you try to rid yourself of your father, they will soon play 
die same trick on you, denigrating everything you have accomplished. Just 
as you rise by rebelling against the past, keep an eye on those rising from 
below, and never give them the chance to do the same to you. 

The great Baroque artist and architect Pietro Bernini was a master at 
sniffing out younger potential rivals and keeping diem in his shadow. One 
day a young stonemason named Francesco Borromini showed Bernini his 
architectural sketches. Recognizing his talent immediately, Bernini in- 
standy hired Borromini as his assistant, which delighted the young man but 
was actually only a tactic to keep him close at hand, so that he could play 
psychological games on him and create in him a kind of inferiority com¬ 
plex. And indeed, despite Borromini s brilliance, Bernini has the greater 
fame. His strategy with Borromini he made a lifelong practice: Fearing that 
the great sculptor Alessandro Algardi, for example, would eclipse him in 
fame, he arranged it so that Algardi could only find work as his assistant. 
And any assistant who rebelled against Bernini and tried to strike out on 
his own would find his career ruined. 



LAW 



STRIKE THE SHEPHERD 
AND THE SHEEP 
WILL SCATTER 


JUDGMENT 

Trouble can often be traced to a single strong individ¬ 
ual—the stirrer, the arrogant underling, the poisoner of 
goodwill . If you allow such people room to operate, others 
will succumb to their influence. Do not wait for the trou¬ 
bles they cause to multiply * do not try to negotiate with 
them—they are irredeemable. Neutralize their influence 
by isolating or banishing them. Strike at the source of the 
trouble and the sheep will scatter. 




OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I 

Near the end of the sixth century B.C., the city-state of Athens overthrew 
the series of petty tyrants who had dominated its politics for decades. It es¬ 
tablished instead a democracy that was to last over a century, a democ¬ 
racy that became the source of its power and its proudest achievement. 
But as the democracy evolved, so did a problem the Athenians had never 
faced: How to deal with those who did not concern themselves with the 
cohesion of a small city surrounded by enemies, who did not work for its 
greater glory, but thought of only themselves and their own ambitions and 
petty intrigues? The Athenians understood that these people, if left alone, 
would sow' dissension, divide the city into factions, and stir up anxieties, 
all of which could lead, to the ruin of their democracy. 

Violent punishment no longer suited the new, civilized order that 
Athens had created. Instead the citizens found another, more satisfying, 
and less brutal way to deal with the chronically selfish: Every year they 
would gather in the marketplace and write on a piece of earthenware, an 
ostrakon , the name of an individual they wanted to see banished from the 
city for ten years. If a particular name appeared on six thousand ballots, 
that person would instantly be exiled. If no one received six thousand 
votes, the person with the most ostraka recording his name would suffer 
the ten-year “ostracism.” This ritual expulsion became a kind of festival— 
what a joy to be able to banish those irritating, anxiety-inducing individu¬ 
als who wanted to rise above the group they should have served. 

In 490 B.C., Aristides, one of the great generals of Athenian history, 
helped defeat the Persians at the battle of Marathon. Meanwhile, off the 
battlefield, his fairness as a judge had earned him the nickname “The 
Just.” But as the years went by the Athenians came to dislike him. He 
made such a show of his righteousness, and this, they believed, disguised 
his feelings of superiority and scorn for the common folk. His omnipres¬ 
ence in Athenian politics became obnoxious; the citizens grew tired of 
hearing him called “The Just.” They feared that this was just the type of 
man—judgmental, haughty—who would eventually stir up fierce divi¬ 
sions among them. In 482 B.c., despite Aristides* invaluable expertise in 
the continuing war with the Persians, they collected the ostraka and had 
him banished. 

After Aristides’ ostracism, the great general Themistocles emerged as 
the city’s premier leader. But his many honors and victories went to his 
head, and he too became arrogant and overbearing, constantly reminding 
the Athenians of his triumphs in battle, the temples he had built, the dan¬ 
gers he had fended off. He seemed to be saying that without him the city 
would come to ruin. And so, in 472 B.C., Themistocles’ name was filled in 
on the ostraka and the city was rid of his poisonous presence. 

The greatest political figure in fifth-century Athens was undoubtedly 
Pericles. Although several times threatened with ostracism, he avoided 
that fate by maintaining close ties with the people. Perhaps he had learned 
a lesson as a child from his favorite tutor, the incomparable Damon, who 


THK rosgurcsT or mu 

The struggle now 
became fiercer than 
ever around the royal 
Utter (of Atahualpa, 
king of the Incan 
empire). It reeled more, 
and more, and at 
length, several of the 
nobles who supported 
it having been stain,, it 
was overturned, and 
the Indian prince 
would have come with 
violence to the ground, 
had not his fall been 
broken by the efforts of 
Pizarro and some other 
of the cavaliers ; who 
caught him in their 
arms. The imperial 
boria was instantly 
snatched from his 
temples by a soldier, 
and the unhappy 
monarch, strongly 
secured, was removed 
to a neighboring build¬ 
ing where he care¬ 
fully guarded. 

All attempt at resis¬ 
tance now ceased. The 
fate o f the Inca 
(Atahualpa] soon 
spread over town and 
country. The charm 
that might have held 
the Peruvians together 
was dissolved. Every 
man thought only of 
his own safety. Even 
the (Incan] soldiery 
encamped on the adja¬ 
cent fields took the 
alarm, and, learning the 
fatal tidings, were seen 
}lying in every direction 
before their pursuers, 
who in the heat of 
triumph showed no 
touch of mercy. At 
length night, more piti¬ 
ful than man, threw her 
friendly mantle over 
the fugitives, and the 


259 


LAW 42 




scattered troops of 
Pizarro rallied once 
more at the sound of 
the trumpet in 
the bloody square of 
Cajamarca .,.. 
I'Atahualpa / was rever¬ 
enced as more than a 
human . He imr not 
merely the head of the 
state, but the point to 
which all its institutions 
converged as to a 
common center—the 
keystone of the politi¬ 
cal fabric which must 
fall to pieces by its own 
weight when that n ay 
withdrawn. So it fared 
on the /executionJ of 
Atahualpa. His death 
not only left the throne 
vacant , without any 
certain successor, but 
the manner of it 
announced to the 
Peruvian people that 
a hand stronger than 
that of their Incas had 
now seized the scepter, 
and that the dynasty 
of the Children of the 
Sun had passed 
away forever. 

THE COKQUEST OF PERU 

Wiluam H. Prescott, 
1847 


excelled above all other Athenians in his intelligence, his musical skills, 
and his rhetorical abilities. It was Damon who had trained Pericles in the 
arts of ruling. But he, too, suffered ostracism, for his superior airs and his 
insulting manner toward the commoners stirred up too much resentment 

Toward the end of the century there lived a man named Hyperbolus. 
Most writers of the time describe him as the city's most worthless citizen: 
He did not care what anyone thought of him, and slandered whomever he 
disliked. He amused some, but irritated many more. In 417 B.C., Hyperbo¬ 
lus saw an opportunity to stir up anger against the two leading politicians 
of the time, Alcibiades and Nicias. He hoped that one of die two would be 
ostracized and that he would rise in that man’s place. His campaign 
seemed likely to succeed: The Athenians disliked Alcibiades’ flamboyant 
and carefree lifestyle, and were wary of Nicias’ wealth and aloofness. 
They seemed certain to ostracize one or the other. But Alcibiades and 
Nicias, although they were otherwise enemies, pooled their resources and 
managed to turn the ostracism on Hyperbolus instead. His obnoxious¬ 
ness, they argued, could only be terminated by banishment. 

Earlier sufferers of ostracism had been formidable, powerful men. 
Hyperbolus, however, was a low buffoon, and with his banishment the 
Athenians felt that ostracism had been degraded. And so they ended the 
practice that for nearly a hundred years had been one of the keys to keep¬ 
ing the peace within Athens, 

Interpretation 

The ancient Athenians had social instincts unknown today—the passage 
of centuries has blunted them. Citizens in the true sense of the word, the 
Athenians sensed the dangers posed by asocial behavior, and saw how 
such behavior often disguises itself in other forms; the holier-than-thou at¬ 
titude that silently seeks to impose its standards on others; overweening 
ambition at the expense of the common good; the flaunting of superiority; 
quiet scheming; terminal obnoxiousness. Some of these behaviors would 
eat away at the city’s cohesion by creating factions and sowing dissension, 
others would min the democratic spirit by making the common citizen 
feel inferior and envious. The Athenians did not try to reeducate people 
who acted in these ways, or to absorb them somehow into the group, or to 
impose a violent punishment that would only create other problems. The 
solution was quick and effective: Get rid of them. 

Within any group, trouble can most often be traced to a single source, 
the unhappy, chronically dissatisfied one who will always stir up dissen¬ 
sion and infect the group with his or her ill ease. Before you know what hit 
you the dissatisfaction spreads. Act before it becomes impossible to disen¬ 
tangle one strand of misery from another, or to see how the whole thing 
started. First, recognize troublemakers by their overbearing presence, or 
by their complaining nature. Once you spot them do not try to reform 
them or appease them—that will only make things worse. Do not attack 
them, whether directly or indirectly, for they are poisonous in nature and 


360 LAW 42 



will work underground to destroy you. Do as the Athenians did: Banish 
them before it is too late. Separate them from the group before they be¬ 
come the eye of a whirlpool. Do not give them time to stir up anxieties 
and sow discontent; do not give them room to move. Let one person suf¬ 
fer so that the rest can live in peace. 

When the tree falls, the monkeys scatter .; 

Chinese saying 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II 

In 1296 the cardinals of the Catholic Church met in Rome to select a new 
pope. They chose Cardinal Gaetani, for he was incomparably shrewd; 
such a man would make the Vatican a great power. Taking the name Boni¬ 
face VIII, Gaetani soon proved he deserved the cardinals’ high opinion of 
him: He plotted his moves carefully in advance, and stopped at nothing to 
get his way. Once in power, Boniface quickly crushed his rivals and uni¬ 
fied the Papal States. The European powers began to fear him, and sent 
delegates to negotiate with him. The German King Albrecht of Austria 
even yielded some territory to Boniface. All was proceeding according to 
the pope’s plan. 

One piece did not fall into place, however, and that was Tuscany, the 
richest part of Italy, If Boniface could conquer Florence, Tuscany’s most 
powerful city, the region would be his. But Florence was a proud republic, 
and would be hard to defeat. The pope had to play his cards skillfully. 

Florence was divided by two rival factions, the Blacks and the Whites. 
The Whites were the merchant families that had recently and quickly 
risen to power and wealth; the Blacks were the older money. Because of 
their popularity with the people, the Whites retained control of the city, to 
the Blacks’ increasing resentment. The feud between the two grew steadily 
more bitter. 

Here Boniface saw his chance: He would plot to help the Blacks take 
over the city, and Florence would be in his pocket. And as he studied the 
situation he began to focus on one man, Dante Alighieri, the celebrated 
writer, poet, and ardent supporter of the Whites. Dante had always been 
interested in politics. He believed passionately in the republic, and often 
chastised his fellow citizens for their lack of spine. He also happened to be 
the city’s most eloquent public speaker. In 1300, the year Boniface began 
plotting to take over Tuscany, Dante’s fellow citizens had voted him in to 
Florence’s highest elected position, making him one of the city’s six pri¬ 
ors. During his six-month term in the post, he had stood firmly against the 
Blacks and against all of the pope’s attempts to sow disorder. 

By 1301, however, Boniface had a new plan: He called in Charles de 
Valois, powerful brother of the king of France, to help bring order to Tus¬ 
cany. As Charles marched through northern Italy, and Florence seethed 
with anxiety and fear, Dante quickly emerged as the man who could rally 


THE WOLVES AND 
THE SHEEP 

Once upon a time, the 
wolves sent an embassy 
to the sheep, desiring 
that there might be 
peace between them for 
the time to come. 

“Why, ” said they, 

“should we be for ever 
waging this deadly 
strife? Those wicked 
dogs are the cause of 
all; they are incessantly 
barking at us, and 
provoking us. Send 
them away, and there 
will be no longer any 
obstacle to our eternal 
friendship and peace. ” 
The silly sheep listened, 
the dogs were 
dismissed , and the 
flock, thus deprived of 
their best protectors, 
became an easy prey to 
their treacherous 
enemy. 

FABLES, 

Aesop, 

SIXTH CENTURY B.C. 


LAW 42 361 



THE Ul‘>: or 

tiikmistoui.ks 

(Themis Codes S( fellow 
citizens reached the 
point at which their 
jealousy made them 
listen ro any slander at 
his expense, and so 
jhe} was forced to 
remind the assembly of 
his achievements until 
they could hear this no 
longer. He once said to 
those who were 
complaining of him: 
" Why are you tired of 
receiving benefits so 
often from the same 
men?” Besides this he 
gave offense to the 
people when he built 
the temple of Artemis, 
for not only did he 
style the goddess 
Artemis Aristoboule, or 
A rtemis wisest in conn- 
sel—with the hint that 
it was he who had 
given the best counsel 
to the Athenians and 
the Greeks—but he 
chase a site for it near 
his own house at 
Melite.... So at Iasi the 
Athenians banished 
him. They made use of 
the ostracism to 
humble his great repu¬ 
tation and his author¬ 
ity, as indeed was their 
habit with any whose, 
power they regarded as 
oppressive, or who had 
risen to an eminence 
which they considered 
out of keeping with the 
equality of a 
democracy, 

THE l-IFE OF 
THEM1STOCLES, 
Plutarch, 
c. A.D. 46-120 


the people, arguing vehemently against appeasement and working desper¬ 
ately to arm the citizens and to organize resistance against the pope and 
his puppet French prince. By hook or by crook, Boniface had to neutralize 
Dante. And so, even as on the one hand he threatened Florence with 
Charles de Valois, on the other he held out the olive branch, the possibil¬ 
ity of negotiations, hoping Dante would take the bait. And indeed the Flo¬ 
rentines decided to send a delegation to Rome and try to negotiate a 
peace. To head the mission, predictably, they chose Dante. 

Some warned the poet that the wily pope was setting up a trap to lure 
him away, but Dante went to Rome anyway, arriving as the French army 
stood before the gates of Florence. He felt sure that his eloquence and rea¬ 
son would win the pope over and save the city. Yet when the pope met the 
poet and the Florentine delegates, he instantly intimidated them, as he did 
so many. “Fall on your knees before met” he bellowed at their first meet¬ 
ing. “Submit to me! I tell you that in all truth I have nothing in my heart 
but to promote your peace.” Succumbing to his powerful presence, the 
Florentines listened as the pope promised to look after their interests. He 
then advised them to return home, leaving one of their members behind 
to continue the talks. Boniface signaled that the man to stay was to be 
Dante. He spoke with the utmost politeness, but in essence it was an order. 

And so Dante remained in Rome. And while he and the pope contin¬ 
ued their dialogue, Florence fell apart. With no one to rally the Whites, 
and with Charles de Valois using the pope’s money to bribe and sow dis¬ 
sension, the Whites disintegrated, some arguing for negotiations, others 
switching sides. Facing an enemy now divided and unsure of itself, the 
Blacks easily destroyed them within weeks, exacting violent revenge on 
them. And once the Blacks stood firmly in power, the pope finally dis¬ 
missed Dante from Rome. 

The Blacks ordered Dante to return home to face accusations and 
stand trial. When the poet refused, the Blacks condemned him to be 
burned to death if he ever set foot in Florence again. And so Dante began 
a miserable life of exile, wandering through Italy, disgraced in the city that 
he loved, never to return to Florence, even after his death. 

Interpretation 

Boniface knew that if he only had a pretext to lure Dante away, Florence 
would crumble. He played the oldest card in the book—threatening with 
one hand while holding out the olive branch with the other—and Dante 
fell for it. Once the poet was in Rome, the pope kept him there for as long 
as it took. For Boniface understood one of the principal precepts in the 
game of power: One resolute person, one disobedient spirit, can turn a 
flock of sheep into a den of lions. So he isolated the troublemaker. With¬ 
out the backbone of the city to keep them together, the sheep quickly 
scattered. 

Learn the lesson: Do not waste your time lashing out in all directions 
at what seems to be a many-headed enemy. Find the one head that mat- 


362 


LAW 42 



ters—the person with willpower, or smarts, or, most important of all, 
charisma. Whatever it costs you, lure this person away, for once he is ab¬ 
sent his powers will lose their effect. His isolation can be physical (banish¬ 
ment or absence from the court), political (narrowing his base of support), 
or psychological (alienating him from the group through slander and in¬ 
sinuation). Cancer begins with a single cell; excise it before it spreads be¬ 
yond cure. 


KEYS TO POWER 

In the past, an entire nation would be ruled by a king and his handful of 
ministers. Only the elite had any power to play with. Over the centuries, 
power has gradually become more and more diffused and democratized. 
This has created, however, a common misperception that groups no 
longer have centers of power—that power is spread out and scattered 
among many people. Actually, however, power has changed in its num¬ 
bers but not in its essence. There may be fewer mighty tyrants command¬ 
ing the power of life and death over millions, but there remain thousands 
of petty tyrants ruling smaller realms, and enforcing their will through in¬ 
direct power games, charisma, and so on. In every group, power is con¬ 
centrated in the hands of one or two people, for this is one area in which 
human nature will never change: People will congregate around a single 
strong personality like planets orbiting a sun. 

To labor under the illusion that this kind of power center no longer 
exists is to make endless mistakes, waste energy and time, and never hit 
the target. Powerful people never waste time. Outwardly they may play 
along with the game—pretending that power is shared among many—but 
inwardly they keep their eyes on the inevitable few in the group who hold 
the cards. These are the ones they work on. When troubles arise, they 
look for the underlying cause, the single strong character who started the 
stirring and whose isolation or banishment will settle the waters again. 

In his family-therapy practice. Dr. Milton H. Erickson found that if 
the family dynamic was unsettled and dysfunctional there was inevitably 
one person who was the stirrer, the troublemaker. In his sessions he would 
symbolically isolate this rotten apple by seating him or her apart from the 
others, if only by a few feet Slowly the other family members would see 
die physically separate person as the source of their difficulty. Once you 
recognize who the stirrer is, pointing it out to other people will accomplish 
a great deal. Understanding who controls the group dynamic is a critical 
realization. Remember: Stirrers thrive by hiding in the group, disguising 
their actions among the reactions of others. Render their actions visible 
and they lose their power to upset. 

A key element in games of strategy is isolating the enemy’s power. In 
chess you try to comer the king. In the Chinese game of go you try to iso¬ 
late the enemy’s forces in small pockets, rendering them immobile and in¬ 
effectual. It is often better to isolate your enemies than to destroy 



them—you seem less brutal. The result, though, is the same, for in the 
game of power, isolation spells death. 

The most effective form of isolation is somehow to separate your vic¬ 
tims from their power base. When Mao Tse-tung wanted to eliminate an 
enemy in the ruling elite, he did not confront the person directly; he 
silently and stealthily worked to isolate the man, divide his allies and turn 
them away from him, shrink his support. Soon the man would vanish on 
his own. 

Presence and appearance have great import in the game of power. To 
seduce, particularly in the beginning stages, you need to be constantly 
present, or create the feeling that you are; if you are often out of sight, the 
charm will wear off. Queen Elizabeth’s prime minister, Robert Cecil, 
had two main rivals: the queen’s favorite, the Earl of Essex, and her for¬ 
mer favorite. Sir Walter Raleigh. He connived to send them both on a 
mission against Spain; with them away from the court he managed to 
wrap his tentacles around the queen, secure his position as her top ad¬ 
viser and weaken her affection for Raleigh and the earl. The lesson here 
is twofold: First, your absence from the court spells danger for you, and 
you should never leave the scene in a time of turmoil, for your absence 
can both symbolize and induce a loss of power; second, and on the other 
hand, luring your enemies away from the court at critical moments is a 
great ploy. 

Isolation has other strategic uses. When trying to seduce people, it is 
often wise to isolate them from their usual social context. Once isolated 
they are vulnerable to you, and your presence becomes magnified. Simi¬ 
larly, con artists often look for ways to isolate their marks from their nor¬ 
mal social milieux, steering diem into new environments in which they 
are no longer comfortable. Here they feel weak, and succumb to decep¬ 
tion more easily. Isolation, then, can prove a powerful way of bringing 
people under your spell to seduce or swindle them. 

You will often find powerful people who have alienated themselves 
from the group. Perhaps their power has gone to their heads, and they 
consider themselves superior; perhaps they have lost the knack of com¬ 
municating with ordinary folk. Remember: This makes them vulnerable. 
Powerful though they be, people like this can be turned to use. 

The monk Rasputin gained his power over Czar Nicholas and Czar¬ 
ina Alexandra of Russia through their tremendous isolation from the peo¬ 
ple. Alexandra in particular was a foreigner, and especially alienated 
from everyday Russians; Rasputin used his peasant origins to insinuate 
himself into her good graces, for she desperately wanted to communicate 
with her subjects. Once in the court’s inner circle, Rasputin made himself 
indispensable and attained great power. Heading straight for the center, 
he aimed for the one figure in Russia who commanded power (the czarina 
dominated her husband), and found he had no need to isolate her for the 
work was already done. The Rasputin strategy can bring you great power: 
Always search out people who hold high positions yet who find them- 



selves isolated on the board. They are like apples falling into your lap, 
easily seduced, and able to catapult you into power yourself. 

Finally, the reason you strike at the shepherd is because such an ac¬ 
tion will dishearten the sheep beyond any rational measure. When Her¬ 
nando CortSs and Francisco Pizarro led their tiny forces against the Aztec 
and Incan empires, they did not make the mistake of fighting on several 
fronts, nor were they intimidated by the numbers arrayed against them; 
they captured the kings, Moctezuma and Atahualpa. Vast empires fell 
into their hands. With the leader gone the center of gravity is gone; there 
is nothing to revolve around and everything falls apart. Aim at the lead¬ 
ers, bring them down, and look for the endless opportunities in the confu¬ 
sion that will ensue. 


Image: A Flock of Fatted 
Sheep. Do not waste precious 
time trying to steal a sheep or two; do 
not risk life and limb by setting upon 
the dogs that guard the flock. Aim at the 
shepherd. Lure him away and the dogs 
will follow. Strike him down and the flock will 
scatter—you can pick them off one by one. 


Authority: If you draw a bow, draw the 
strongest. If you use an arrow, use the long¬ 
est. To shoot a rider, first shoot his horse. 
To catch a gang of bandits, first capture 
its leader. Just as a country has its 
border, so the killing of men has its limits. If 
the enemy’s attack can be stopped [with a 
blow to the head], why have any more dead 
and wounded than necessary? (Chinese 
poet Tu Fu, Tang dynasty, eighth century) 



REVERSAL 

“Any harm you do to a man should be done in such a way that you need 
not fear his revenge,” writes Machiavelli. If you act to isolate your enemy, 
make sure he lacks the means to repay the favor. If you apply this Law, in 
other words, apply it from a position of superiority, so that you have noth¬ 
ing to fear from his resentment. 

Andrew Johnson, Abraham Lincoln’s successor as U.S. president, 
saw Ulysses S. Grant as a troublesome member of his government. So he 
isolated Grant, as a prelude to forcing him out. This only enraged the 
great general, however, who responded by forming a support base in the 
Republican party and going on to become the next president. It would 
have been far wiser to keep a man like Grant in the fold, where he could 
do less harm, than to make him revengeful. And so you may often find it 
better to keep people on your side, where you can watch them, than to 
risk creating an angry enemy. Keeping them close, you can secretly whit¬ 
tle away at their support base, so that when the time comes to cut them 
loose they will fall fast and hard without knowing what hit them. 




LAW 


43 

WORK ON THE HEARTS 
AND MINDS OF OTHERS 

JUDGMENT 

Coercion creates a reaction that will eventually work 
against you. You must seduce others into wanting to 
move in your direction. A person you have seduced be¬ 
comes your loyal pawn . And the way to seduce others is to 
operate on their individual psychologies and weaknesses . 
Soften up the resistant by working on their emotions , 
playing on what they hold dear and what they fear. Ig¬ 
nore the hearts and minds of others and they will grow to 
hate you. 




CYRt S'H RI SE 

Thinking of the means 
by which he could 
m o s t e ffe c i i v e l y 
persuade the Persians 
to revolt, {Cyrus’s] 
deliberations led hint to 
adopt the. following 
plan, which he found 
best suited to his 
purpose. He wrote on a 
roll of parchment that 
Astyages had 
appointed him to 
command the Persian 
army; then he 
summoned an assem¬ 
bly of the Persians, 
opened the roll in their 
presence and read out 
what he had written. 
"And now, he added, 
t have an order for 
you: every man is to 
appear on parade with 
a billhook ....” 
The order was obeyed. 
AU the men assembled 
with their billhooks, 
and Cyrus’s next 
command was that 
before the day was out 
they should clear a 
certain piece of rough 
(and full of thorn- 
bushes, about eighteen 
or twenty furlongs 
square. This too was 
done, whereupon Cyrus 
issued the further order 
that they should 
present themselves 
again on the following 
day, after having taken 
a bath. Meanwhile, 
Cyrus collected and 
slaughtered all his 
father’s goats, sheep, 
and oxen in preparation 
for entertaining the 
whole Persian army at 
a banquet, together 
with the best wine and 
bread he could procure. 
The next day the guests 
assembled, and were 

MS LAW 43 


TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

Near the end of the reign of Louis XV, all of France seemed desperate for 
change. When the king’s grandson and chosen successor, the future Louis 
XVI, married the fifteen-year-old daughter of the empress of Austria, the 
French caught a glimpse of the future that seemed hopeful. The young 
bride, Marie-Antoinette, was beautiful and full of life. She instantly 
changed the mood of the court, which was rank with Louis XV’s de¬ 
baucheries; even the common people, who had yet to see her, talked excit¬ 
edly of Marie-Antoinette. The French had grown disgusted with the series 
of mistresses who had dominated Louis XV, and they looked forward to 
serving their new queen. In 1773, when Marie-Antoinette publicly rode 
through the streets of Paris for the first time, applauding crowds swarmed 
around her carriage. “How fortunate,” she wrote her mother, “to be in a 
position in which one can gain widespread affection at so little cost.” 

In 1774 Louis XV died and Louis XVI took the throne. As soon as 
Marie-Antoinette became queen she abandoned herself to the pleasures 
she loved the most—ordering and wearing the most expensive gowns and 
jewelry in the realm; sporting the most elaborate hair in history, her 
sculpted coiffures rising as much as three feet above her head; and throwing 
a constant succession of masked balls and fetes. All of these whims she paid 
for on credit, never concerning herself with the cost or who paid the bills. 

Marie-Antoinette’s greatest pleasure was the creation and designing of 
a private Garden of Eden at the Petit Trianon, a chateau on the grounds of 
Versailles with its own woods. The gardens at the Petit Trianon were to be 
as “natural” as possible, including moss applied by hand to the trees and 
rocks. To heighten the pastoral effect, the queen employed peasant milk¬ 
maids to milk the finest-looking cows in the realm; launderers and cheese- 
makers in special peasant outfits she helped design; shepherds to tend 
sheep with silk ribbons around their necks. When she inspected the barns, 
she would watch her milkmaids squeezing milk into porcelain vases made 
at the royal ceramic works. To pass the time, Marie-Antoinette would 
gather flowers in the woods around the Petit Trianon, or watch her “good 
peasants” doing their “chores.” The place became a separate world, its 
community limited to her chosen favorites. 

With each new whim, the cost of maintaining the Petit Trianon soared. 
Meanwhile, France itself was deteriorating: There was famine and wide¬ 
spread discontent. Even socially insulated courtiers seethed with resent¬ 
ment—the queen treated them like children. Only her favorites mattered, 
and these were becoming fewer and fewer. But Marie-Antoinette did not 
concern herself with this. Not once throughout her reign did she read a 
minister’s report. Not once did she tour the provinces and rally the people 
to her side. Not once did she mingle among the Parisians, or receive a del¬ 
egation from them. She did none of these things because as queen she felt 
the people owed her their affection, and she was not required to love them 
in return. 

In 1784 the queen became embroiled in a scandal. As part of an elabo¬ 
rate swindle, the most expensive diamond necklace in Europe had been 



purchased under her name, and during the swindlers’ trial her lavish 
lifestyle became public: People heard about the money she spent on jewels 
and dresses and masked dances. They gave her the nickname “Madame 
Deficit,” and from then on she became the focus of the people’s growing 
resentment. When she appeared in her box at the opera the audience 
greeted her with hisses. Even the court turned against her. For while she 
had been running up her huge expenditures, the country was headed for 
ruin. 

Five years later, in 1789, an unprecedented event took place: the be¬ 
ginning of the French Revolution. The queen did not worry—let the peo¬ 
ple have their little rebellion, she seemed to think; it would soon quiet 
down and she would be able to resume her life of pleasure. That year the 
people marched on Versailles, forcing the royal family to quit the palace 
and take residence in Paris. This was a triumph for the rebels, but it offered 
the queen an opportunity to heal the wounds she had opened and establish 
contact with the people. The queen, however, had not learned her lesson: 
Not once would she leave the palace during her stay in Paris. Her subjects 
could rot in hell for all she cared. 

In 1792 the royal couple was moved from the palace to a prison, as the 
revolution officially declared the end of the monarchy. The following year 
Louis XVI was tried, found guilty, and guillotined. As Marie-Antoine tie 
awaited the same fate, hardly a soul came to her defense—not one of her 
former friends in the court, not one of Europe’s other monarchs (who, as 
members of their own countries’ royal families, had all the reason in the 
world to show that revolution did not pay), not even her own family in 
Austria, including her brother, who now sat on the throne. She had be¬ 
come the world’s pariah. In October of 1793, she finally knelt at the guillo¬ 
tine, unrepentant and defiant to the bitter end. 

Interpretation 

From early on, Marie-Antoinette acquired the most dangerous of attitudes: 
As a young princess in Austria she was endlessly flattered and cajoled. As 
the future queen of the French court she was the center of everyone’s atten¬ 
tion. She never learned to charm or please other people, to become at¬ 
tuned to their individual psychologies. She never had to work to get her 
way, to use calculation or cunning or the arts of persuasion. And like every¬ 
one who is indulged from an early age, she evolved into a monster of in¬ 
sensitivity. 

Marie-Antoinette became the focus of an entire country’s dissatisfac¬ 
tion because it is so infuriating to meet with a person who makes no effort 
to seduce you or attempt to persuade you, even if only for the purpose of 
deception. And do not imagine that she represents a bygone era, or that 
she is even rare. Her type is today more common than ever. Such types live 
in their own bubble—they seem to feel they are bom kings and queens, 
and that attention is owed them. They do not consider anyone else's na¬ 
ture, but bulldoze over people with the self-righteous arrogance of a Marie- 
Antoinette. Pampered and indulged as children, as adults they still believe 


told to sit down on the 
grass and enjoy 
themselves. After the 
meal Cyrus asked them 
which they preferred — 
yesterday's work or 
today’s amusement; 
and they replied that it 
was indeed, afar cry 
from the previous day's 
misery to their present 
pleasures, This was the 
answer which Cyrus 
wanted; he seized upon 
it at once and 
proceeded to lay bare 
what he had in mind. 
“Men of Persia , ” he 
said . “listen to me: obey 
my orders, and you will 
be able to enjoy a thou¬ 
sand pleasures as good 
as this without ever 
turning your hands to 
menial labor; but, if 
you disobey, yester¬ 
day s task will he the 
pattern of innumerable 
others you will be 
forced to perform. Take 
my advice and win 
your freedom. 1 am the 
man destined to under¬ 
take your liberation , 
and it is my belief that 
you are a match for the 
Medes in war as in 
everything else. It is the 
truth l tell you. Do not 
delay , but fling off the 
yoke of Asiyages at 
once." 

The Persians had long 
resented their subjec¬ 
tion to the Medes. At 
last they had found a 
leader, and welcomed 
with enthusiasm the 
prospect of liberty.... 
On the present occasion 
the Persians under 
Cyrus rose against the 
Medes and from then 
onwards were masters 
of Asia. 

THE HISTORIES, 

Herodotus, 

FIFTH CENTURY S.C.. 


LAW 43 369 




ini-; <;kntu: a hi 

Ol- PKK.SUASION 

The north wind and the 
sun were disputing 
which was the stronger, 
and agreed to 
acknowledge as the 
victor whichever of 
them could strip a 
traveler of his clothing. 
The wind tried first. 
But its violent gusts 
only made the man 
hold his clothes tightly 
around him, and when 
it blew harder still the 
cold made him so 
uncomfortable that he 
put on an extra wrap. 
Eventually the wind 
got tired of it and 
handed him over to the 
sun. The sun shone first 
with a moderate 
warmth , which made 
the man take off his 
topcoat. Then it blazed 
fiercely, till, unable 
to stand the heat . 
he. stripped and went 
off to bathe in a 
nearby river. 
Persuasion is more 
effective than force. 

FABLES, 

Aesop, 
SIXTH CENTUKY B.O. 


that everything must come to them; convinced of their own charm, they 
make no effort to charm, seduce, or gently persuade. 

In the realm of power, such attitudes are disastrous. At all times you 
must attend to those around you, gauging their particular psycholog)', tai¬ 
loring your words to what you know will entice and seduce them. This re¬ 
quires energy and art The higher your station, the greater the need to 
remain attuned to the hearts and minds of those below you, creating a base 
of support to maintain you at the pinnacle. Without that base, your power 
will teeter, and at the slightest change of fortune those below will gladly as¬ 
sist in your fall from grace. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

In A.D. 225, Chuko Liang, master strategist and chief minister to the ruler 
of Shu in ancient China, confronted a dangerous situation. The kingdom of 
Wei had mounted an all-out attack on Shu from the north. More dangerous 
still, Wei had formed an alliance with the barbarous states to the south of 
Shu, led by King Menghuo. Chuko Liang had to deal with this second 
menace from the south before he could hope to fend off Wei in the north. 

As Chuko Liang prepared to march south against the barbarians, a 
wise man in his camp offered him advice. It would be impossible, this man 
said, to pacify the region by force. Liang would probably beat Menghuo, 
but as soon as he headed north again to deal with Wei, Menghuo would 
reinvade. “It is better to win hearts,” said the wise man, “than cities; better 
to battle with hearts than with weapons. I hope you will succeed in winning 
the hearts of these people ” “You read my thoughts,” responded Chuko 
Liang. 

As Liang expected, Menghuo launched a powerful attack. But Liang 
laid a trap and managed to capture a large part of Menghuo’s army, includ¬ 
ing the king himself. Instead of punishing or executing his prisoners, how¬ 
ever, he separated the soldiers from their king, had their shackles removed, 
regaled them with food and wine, and then addressed them. “You are all 
upright men,” he said. “I believe you all have parents, wives, and children 
waiting for you at home. They are doubtless shedding bitter tears at your 
fate. I am going to release you, so that you can return home to your loved 
ones and comfort them.” The men thanked Dang with tears in their eyes; 
then he sent for Menghuo. “If I release you,” asked Dang, “what will you 
do?” “I will pull my army together again,” answered the king, “and lead it 
against you to a decisive battle. But if you capture me a second time, I will 
bow to your superiority.” Not only did Dang order Menghuo released, he 
gave him a gift of a horse and saddle. When angry lieutenants wondered 
why he did this, Dang told them, “I can capture that man as easily as I can 
take something out of my pocket. I am trying to win his heart. When I do, 
peace will come of itself here in the south.” 

As Menghuo had said he would, he attacked again. But his own offi¬ 
cers, whom Dang had treated so well, rebelled against him, captured him, 
and turned him over to Dang, who asked him again the same question as 


370 


LAW 43 



before. Menghuo replied that he had not been beaten fairly, but merely be¬ 
trayed by his own officers; he would fight again, but if captured a third time 
he would bow to Liang’s superiority. 

Over the following months Liang outwitted Menghuo again and again, 
capturing him a third, a fourth, and a fifth time. On each occasion Meng- 
huo’s troops grew more dissatisfied. Liang had treated them with respect; 
they had lost their heart for fighting. But every time Chuko Liang asked 
Menghuo to yield, the great king would come up with another excuse: You 
tricked me, I lost through bad luck, on and on. If you capture me again, 
he would promise, I swear I will not betray you. And so Liang would let 
him go. 

When he captured Menghuo for the sixth time, he asked the king the 
same question again. “If you capture me a seventh time,” the king replied, 
“I shall give you my loyalty and never rebel again,” “Very well,” said 
Liang. “But if I capture you again, I will not release you.” 

Now Menghuo and his soldiers fled to a far comer of their kingdom, 
the region of Wuge. Defeated so many times, Menghuo had only one hope 
left: He would ask the help of King Wutugu of Wuge, who had an immense 
and ferocious army. Wutugu’s warriors wore an armor of tightly woven 
vines soaked in oil, then dried to an impenetrable hardness. With 
Menghuo at his side, Wutugu marched this mighty army against Liang, and 
this time the great strategist seemed frightened, leading his men in a hur¬ 
ried retreat. But he was merely leading Wutugu into a trap: He cornered 
the king’s men in a narrow valley, then lit fires set all around them. When 
the fires reached the soldiers Wutugu’s whole army burst into flame—the 
oil in their armor, of course, being highly flammable. All of them perished. 

Liang had managed to separate Menghuo and his entourage from the 
carnage in the valley, and the king found himself a captive for the seventh 
time. After this slaughter Liang could not bear to face his prisoner again. 
He sent a messenger to the captured king: “He has commissioned me to re¬ 
lease you. Mobilize another army against him, if you can, and try once 
more to defeat him.” Sobbing, the king fell to the ground, crawled to Liang 
on his hands and knees, and prostrated himself at his feet. “Oh great minis¬ 
ter,” cried Menghuo, “yours is the majesty of Heaven. We men of the south 
will never again offer resistance to your rule,” “Do you now yield?” asked 
Liang. “I, my sons, and my grandsons are deeply moved by Your Honor’s 
boundless, life-giving mercy. How could we not yield?” 

Liang honored Menghuo with a great banquet, reestablished him on 
the throne, restored his conquered lands to his rule, then returned north 
with his army, leaving no occupying force. Liang never came back—he had 
no need to: Menghuo had become his most devoted and unshakable ally. 

Interpretation 

Chuko Iiang had two options: Try to defeat the barbarians in the south 
with one crushing blow, or patiently and slowly win them to his side over 
time. Most people more powerful than their enemy grab the first option 
and never consider the second, but the truly powerful think far ahead: The 


The men who have 
changed the universe 
have never gotten there 
by working on tenders, 
but rather by moving 
the masses, Working on 
leaders is the method of 
intrigue and only leads 
to secondary results. 
Working on the masses, 
however, is (he stroke 
of genius that changes 
the face of the world. 

Napoleon Bonaparte, 
17691821 


I JFK OK Al.KXANDKH 
Till-, CKKA'r 

This long and painful 
pursuit of Darius—for 
in eleven days he 
marched 33 hundred 
fu rlongs—harassed his 
soldiers so that most of 
them were ready to give 
it up, chiefly for want 
of witter. While they 
were in this distress, it 
happened that some 
Macedonians who had 
fetched water in skins 
upon their mules from 
a river they had found 
out came about noon 
to the place where 
Alexander was, and 
seeing him almost 
choked with thirst, 
presently filled a helmet 
ami offered it him. ... 
Then he took the 
helmet into his hands, 
and looking round 
about, when he saw all 
those who were near 
him si retching their 
heads out and looking 
earnestly after the 
drink, he returned it 
again with thanks 


LAW 43 


371 




without tasting tt 
drop of it. 

"For,” said he, "if I 
alone should drink, the 
rest will he out of 
heart. ” The soldiers no 
sooner took notice of 
his temperance and 
magnanimity upon this 
occasion, but they one 
and all cried out to him 
to lead them forward 
boldly, and began 
whipping on their 
horses. For whilst they 
had such a king they 
said they defied both 
weariness and thirst, 
and looked upon them¬ 
selves to be little less 
than immortal. 

THE tire OF 
ALEXANDER THK GREAT. 

Plutarch. 
c. A. a 46-120 


first option may be quick and easy, but over time it brews ugly emotions in 
the hearts of the vanquished. Their resentment turns to hatred; such ani¬ 
mosity keeps you on edge—you spend your energy protecting what you 
have gained, growing paranoid and defensive. The second option, though 
more difficult, not only brings you peace of mind, it converts a potential 
enemy into a pillar of support. 

In all your encounters, take a step back—take the time to calculate and 
attune yourself to your targets’ emotional makeup and psychological weak¬ 
nesses. Force will only strengthen their resistance. With most people the 
heart is the key: They are like children, ruled by their emotions. To soften 
them up, alternate harshness with mercy. Play on their basic fears, and also 
their loves—freedom, family, etc. Once you break them down, you will 
have a lifelong friend and fiercely loyal ally. 

Governments saw men only in mass; but our men, being irregulars, were not 
formations, but individuals. , . . Our kingdoms lay in each man ’$ mind. 

Seven Pillars of Wisdom, T. E. Lawrence, 1888-1935 


KEYS TO POWER 

In the game of power, you are surrounded by people who have absolutely 
no reason to help you unless it is in their interest to do so. And if you have 
nothing to offer their self-interest, you are likely to make them hostile, for 
they will see in you just one more competitor, one more waster of their 
time. Those that overcome this prevailing coldness are the ones who find 
the key that unlocks the stranger’s heart and mind, seducing him into their 
comer, if necessary softening him up for a punch. But most people never 
learn this side of the game. When they meet someone new, rather than 
stepping back and probing to see what makes this person unique, they talk 
about themselves, eager to impose their own willpower and prejudices. 
They argue, boast, and make a show of their power. They may not know it 
but they are secretly creating an enemy, a resister, because there is no 
more infuriating feeling than having your individuality ignored, your own 
psychology unacknowledged. It makes you feel lifeless and resentful. 

Remember; The key to persuasion is softening people up and break¬ 
ing them down, gently. Seduce them with a two-pronged approach: Work 
on their emotions and play on their intellectual weaknesses. Be alert to 
both what separates them from everyone else (their individual psychology) 
and what they share with everyone else (their basic emotional responses). 
Aim at the primary emotions—love, hate, jealousy. Once you move their 
emotions you have reduced their control, making them more vulnerable to 
persuasion. 

When Chuko Liang wanted to dissuade an important general of a rival 
kingdom from entering into an alliance with Ts’ao Ts’ao, Liang’s dreaded 
enemy, he did not detail Ts’ao Ts’ao’s cruelty, or attack him on moral 
grounds. Instead Liang suggested that Ts’ao Ts’ao was really after the gen- 


572 


LAW 43 




eraPs beautiful young wife. This hit the general in the gut, and won him 
over. Mao Tse-tung similarly always appealed to popular emotions, and 
spoke in the simplest terms. Educated and well-read himself, in his 
speeches he used visceral metaphors, voicing the public’s deepest anxieties 
and encouraging diem to vent their frustrations in public meetings. Rather 
than arguing the practical aspects of a particular program, he would de¬ 
scribe how it would affect them on the most primitive, down-to-earth level. 
Do not believe that this approach works only with the illiterate and un¬ 
schooled—it works on one and all. All of us are mortal and face the same 
dreadful fate, and all of us share the desire for attachment and belonging. 
Stir up these emotions and you captivate our hearts. 

The best way to do this is with a dramatic jolt, of the kind that Chuko 
Liang created when he fed and released prisoners who expected only the 
worst from him. Shaking them to the core, he softened their hearts. Play on 
contrasts like this: Push people to despair, then give them relief. If they ex¬ 
pect pain and you give diem pleasure, you win their hearts. Creating plea¬ 
sure of any kind, in fact, will usually bring you success, as will allaying fears 
and providing or promising security. 

Symbolic gestures are often enough to win sympathy and goodwill. A 
gesture of self-sacrifice, for example—a show that you suffer as those 
around you do—will make people identify with you, even if your suffering 
is symbolic or minor and theirs is real. When you enter a group, make a 
gesture of goodwill; soften the group up for the harsher actions that will fol¬ 
low later. 

When T. E. Lawrence was fighting the Turks in the deserts of the Mid¬ 
dle East during World War I, he had an epiphany: It seemed to him that 
conventional warfare had lost its value. The old-fashioned soldier was lost 
in die enormous armies of the time, in which he was ordered about like a 
lifeless pawn. Lawrence wanted to turn this around. For him, every sol¬ 
dier’s mind was a kingdom he had to conquer. A committed, psychologi¬ 
cally motivated soldier would fight harder and more creatively than a 
puppet. 

Lawrence’s perception is still more true in the world today, where so 
many of us feel alienated, anonymous, and suspicious of authority, all of 
which makes overt power plays and force even more counterproductive 
and dangerous. Instead of manipulating lifeless pawns, make those on your 
side convinced and excited by the cause you have enlisted them in; this 
will not only make your work easier but it will also give you more leeway 
to deceive them later on. And to accomplish this you need to deal with 
their individual psychologies. Never clumsily assume that the tactic that 
worked on one person will necessarily work on another. To find the key 
that will motivate them, first get them to open up. The more they talk, the 
more they reveal about their likes and dislikes—the handles and levers to 
move them with. 

The quickest way to secure people’s minds is by demonstrating, as 
simply as possible, how an action will benefit them. Self interest is the 



strongest motive of all: A great cause may capture minds, but once the first 
flush of excitement is over, interest will flag—unless there is something to 
be gained. Self-interest is the solider foundation. The causes that work best 
use a noble veneer to cover a blatant appeal to self-interest; the cause se¬ 
duces but the self-interest secures the deal. 

The people who are best at appealing to people’s minds are often 
artists, intellectuals, and those of a more poetic nature. This is because 
ideas are most easily communicated through metaphors and imagery. It is 
always good policy, then, to have in your pocket at least one artist or intel¬ 
lectual who can appeal concretely to people’s minds. Kings have always 
kept a stable of writers in their bam: Frederick the Great had his Voltaire 
(until they quarreled arid separated), Napoleon won over Goethe. Con¬ 
versely, Napoleon Ill’s alienation of writers such as Victor Hugo, whom he 
exiled from France, contributed to his growing unpopularity and eventual 
downfall. It is dangerous, then, to alienate those who have powers of ex¬ 
pression, and useful to pacify and exploit them. 

Finally, learn to play the numbers game. The wider your support base 
the stronger your power. Understanding that one alienated, disaffected 
soul can spark a blaze of discontent, Louis XIV made sure to endear him¬ 
self to the lowest members of his staff. You too must constantly win over 
more allies on all levels—a time will inevitably come when you will need 
them. 


Image: 

The Keyhole, 
People build 
walls to keep you 
out; never force 
your way in — you 
will find only more 
walls within walls. 
There are doors in 
these walls, doors to 
the heart and mind, and 
they have tiny key¬ 
holes. Peer through the 
keyhole, find the key 
that opens the door, 
and you have access 
to their will with 
no ugly signs 
of forced 
entry. 


S74 ! LAW 43 



Authority: The difficulties in the way of persuasion lie in my know 
mg the heart of the persuaded in order thereby to fit my wording 
into it . . . For this reason, whoever attempts persuasion before 
the throne, must carefully observe the sovereign’s feelings of love 
and hate, his secret wishes and fears, before he can conquer 
his heart. (Han-fei-tzu, Chinese philosopher, third century R.C.) 


REVERSAL 

There is no possible reversal to this Law. 



LAW 


44 

DISARM AND INFURIATE 
WITH THE MIRROR EFFECT 

JUDGMENT 

The mirror reflects reality , but it is also the perfect tool for 
deception: When you mirror your enemies, doing exactly 
as they do, they cannot figure out your strategy. The Mir¬ 
ror Effect mocks and humiliates them, making them over¬ 
react. By holding up a mirror to their psyches, you seduce 
them with the illusion that you share their values; try 
holding up a mirror to their actions, you teach them a 
lesson. Few can resist the power of the Mirror Effect. 



MIRROR EFFECTS: Preliminary Typology 

Mirrors have the power to disturb us. Gazing at our reflection in the mir¬ 
ror, we most often see what we want to see—the image of ourselves with 
which we are most comfortable. We tend not to look too closely, ignoring 
the wrinkles and blemishes. But if we do look hard at the reflected image, 
we sometimes feel that we are seeing ourselves as others see us, as a person 
among other people, an object rather than a subject. That feeling makes us 
shudder—we see ourselves, but from the outside, minus the thoughts, 
spirit, and soul that fill our consciousness. We are a thing. 

In using Mirror Effects we symbolically re-create this disturbing power 
by mirroring the actions of other people, mimicking their movements to 
unsetde and infuriate them. Made to feel mocked, cloned, objectlike, an 
image without a soul, they get angry. Or do the same thing slightly differ 
ently and they might feel disarmed—you have perfectly reflected their 
wishes and desires. This is the narcissistic power of mirrors. In either case, 
the Mirror Effect unsettles your targets, whether angering or entrancing 
them, and in that instant you have the power to manipulate or seduce 
them. The Effect contains great power because it operates on the most 
primitive emotions. 

There are four main Mirror Effects in the realm of power: 

The Neutralizing Effect. In ancient Greek mythology, the Gorgon 
Medusa had serpents for hair, protruding tongue, massive teeth, and a face 
so ugly that anyone who gazed at her was turned into stone, out of fright. 
But the hero Perseus managed to slay Medusa by polishing his bronze 
shield into a mirror, then using the reflection in the mirror to guide him as 
he crept up and cut off her head without looking at her directly. If the 
shield in this instance was a mirror, the mirror also was a kind of shield: 
Medusa could not see Perseus, she saw only her own reflected actions, and 
behind this screen the hero stole up and destroyed her. 

This is the essence of the Neutralizing Effect: Do what your enemies 
do, following their actions as best you can, and they cannot see what you 
are up to—they are blinded by your mirror. Their strategy for dealing with 
you depends on your reacting to them in a way characteristic of you; neu¬ 
tralize it by playing a game of mimicry with them. The tactic has a mock¬ 
ing, even infuriating effect. Most of us remember the childhood experience 
of someone teasing us by repeating our words exactly—after a while, usu¬ 
ally not long, we wanted to punch them in the face. Working more subtly 
as an adult, you can still unsettle your opponents this way; shielding your 
own strategy with the mirror, you lay invisible traps, or push your oppo¬ 
nents into the trap they planned for you. 

This powerful technique has been used in military strategy since the 
days of Sun-tzu; in our own time it often appears in political campaigning. 
It is also useful for disguising those situations in which you have no particu¬ 
lar strategy' yourself. This is the Warrior’s Mirror. 

A reverse version of the Neutralizing Effect is the Shadow: You 


THE MERCHANT AND 
HIS FRIEND 


A certain merchant 
once had a great desire 
to make a long journey . 
Now in regard that he 
was not very wealthy, 
"It is requisite ," said he 
to himself, "that before 
my departure. I should 
leave some part of my 
estate in the city, to the 
end that if / meet with 
HI luck in my travels, 

/ may have wherewithal 
to keep me at my 
return. ” To this purpose 
he delivered a great 
number of bars of iron, 
which were a principal 
part of his wealth, in 
trust to one of his 
friends, desiring him to 
keep them during his 
absence; and then, 
taking his leave, away 
he went. Some time 
after, ha ving had but ill 
luck in his travels, he 
returned home; and the 
first thing he did was to 
go to his friend, and 
demand his iron; but 
his friend, who owed 
several sums of money, 
having sold the iron to 
pay his own debts, 
made him this answer: 
‘"Truly, friend, ” said he, 
“l put your iron into a 
room that was close 
locked, imagining it 
would have been there 
as secure as my own 
gold: but an accident 
has happened which 
no one could have 
suspected, for there 
a rat in the room which 
ate U all up. ” 

The merchant, 
pretending ignorance, 
replied, “U is a terrible 
misfortune to me 
indeed; but 1 know of 


LAW 44 i 377 



old that rats love iron 
extremely; I have 
suffered by them many 
times before in the same 
manner, and therefore 
can the better hear my 
present affliction." 
This answer extremely 
pleased the friend, who 
was glad to hear the 
merchant so well 
inclined to believe that 
a rat had eaten his iron; 

and to remove all 
suspicions, desired him 
to dine with him the 
next day. The merchant 
promised he would, but 
in the meantime he met 
in the middle, of the city 
one of his friend’s chil¬ 
dren; the child he 
carried home, and 
locked up in a room. 
The next day he went to 
his friend, who seemed 
to be in great affliction, 
which he asked him the 
cause of, as if he had 
been perfectly ignorant 
of what had happened, 
“O, my dear friend," 
answered the other, *7 
beg you to excuse me, if 
you do not see me so 
cheerful as otherwise 
I would be; / have lost 
one of my children; 
/ have had him cried by 
sound of trumpet, but 
I know not what is 
become of him. ” 
"Of " replied the 
merchant. ‘7 am grieved 
to hear this; for 
yesterday in the 
evening, as / parted 
from hence, l saw an 
owl in the air with a 
child in his daws; but 
whether it were yours 
l cannot tell. ” 
“Why, you most foolish 
and absurd creaturef v 
replied the friend, “are 
you not ashamed to tell 
such an egregious lie? 
An owl, that weighs at 

378 : LAW 44 


shadow your opponents’ every move without their seeing you. Use the 
Shadow to gather information that will neutralize their strategy later on, 
when you will be able to thwart their every move. The Shadow is effective 
because to follow the movements of others is to gain valuable insights into 
their habits and routines. The Shadow is the preeminent device for detec¬ 
tives and spies. 

The Narcissus Effect Gazing at an image in the waters of a pond, the 
Greek youth Narcissus fell in love with it And when he found out that the 
image was his own reflection, and that he therefore could not consummate 
his love, he despaired and drowned himself. All of us have a similar prob¬ 
lem: We are profoundly in love with ourselves, but since this love excludes 
a love object outside ourselves, it remains continuously unsatisfied and un¬ 
fulfilled. The Narcissus Effect plays on this universal narcissism: You look 
deep into the souls of other people; fathom their inmost desires, their val¬ 
ues, their tastes, their spirit; and you reflect it back to them, making your¬ 
self into a kind of mirror image. Your ability to reflect their psyche gives 
you great power over them; they may even feel a tinge of love. 

This is simply the ability to mimic another person not physically, but 
psychologically, and it is immensely powerful because it plays upon the 
unsatisfied self-love of a child. Normally, people bombard us with their ex¬ 
periences, their tastes. They hardly ever make the effort to see things 
through our eyes. This is annoying, but it also creates great opportunity: If 
you can show you understand another person by reflecting their inmost 
feelings, they will be entranced and disarmed, all the more so because it 
happens so rarely. No one can resist this feeling of being harmoniously re¬ 
flected in the outside world, even though you might well be manufacturing 
it for their benefit, and for deceptive purposes of your own. 

The Narcissus Effect works wonders in both social life and business; it 
gives us both the Seducer’s and the Courtier’s Mirror, 

Hie Moral Effect. The power of verbal argument is extremely limited, 
and often accomplishes the opposite of what is intended. As Gracian re¬ 
marks, “The truth is generally seen, rarely heard.” The Moral Effect is a 
perfect way to demonstrate your ideas through action. Quite simply, you 
teach others a lesson by giving them a taste of their own medicine. 

In the Moral Effect, you mirror what other people have done to you, 
and do so in a way that makes them realize you are doing to them exaedy 
what they did to you. You make them feel that their behavior has been un¬ 
pleasant, as opposed to hearing you complain and whine about it, which 
only gets their defenses up. And as they feel the result of their actions mir¬ 
rored back at them, they realize in the profoundest sense how they hurt or 
punish others with their unsocial behavior. You objectify the qualities you 
want them to feel ashamed of and create a mirror in which they can gaze at 
their follies and learn a lesson about themselves. This technique is often 
used by educators, psychologists, and anyone who has to deal nith un- 



pleasant and unconscious behavior. This is the Teacher's Mirror. Whether 
or not there is actually anything wrong with the way people have treated 
you, however, it can often be to your advantage to reflect it back to them in 
a way that makes them feel guilty about it 

The Hallucinatory Effect Mirrors are tremendously deceptive, for they 
create a sense that you are looking at the real world. Actually, though, you 
are only staring at a piece of glass, which, as everyone knows, cannot show 
the world exactly as it is: Everything in a mirror is reversed. When Alice 
goes through the looking glass in Lewis Carroll's book, she enters a world 
that is back-to-front, and more than just visually. 

The Hallucinatory Effect comes from creating a perfect copy of an ob¬ 
ject, a place, a person. This copy acts as a kind of dummy—people take it 
for the real thing, because it has the physical appearance of the real thing. 
This is the preeminent technique of con artists, who strategically mimic the 
real world to deceive you. It also has applications in any arena that re¬ 
quires camouflage. This is the Deceiver's Mirror. 


OBSERVANCES OF MIRROR EFFECTS 
Observance I 

In February of 1815, the emperor Napoleon escaped from the island of 
Elba, where he had been imprisoned by the allied forces of Europe, and re¬ 
lumed to Paris in a march that stirred the French nation, rallying troops 
and citizens of all classes to his side and chasing his successor, King Louis 
XVII1, off the throne. By March, however, having reestablished himself in 
power, he had to face the fact that France's situation had gravely changed. 
The country was devastated, he had no allies among the other European 
nations, and his most loyal and important ministers had deserted him or 
left the country. Only one man remained from the old regime—Joseph 
Fouche, his former minister of police. 

Napoleon had relied on Fouche to do his dirty work throughout his 
previous reign, but he had never been able to figure his minister out. He 
kept a corps of agents to spy on all of his ministers, so that he would always 
have an edge on them, but no one had gotten anything on Fouche. If sus¬ 
pected of some misdeed, the minister would not get angry or take the accu¬ 
sation personally—he would submit, nod, smile, and change colors 
chameleonlike, adapting to the requirements of the moment. At first this 
had seemed somewhat pleasant and charming, but after a while it frus¬ 
trated Napoleon, who felt outdone by this slippery man. At one time or an¬ 
other he had fired ail of his most important ministers, including Talleyrand, 
but he never touched Fouche. And so, in 1815, back in power and in need 
of help, he felt he had no choice but to reappoint Fouche as his minister of 
police. 

Several weeks into his new reign, Napoleon’s spies told him they be- 


rnoxt not above two or 
three pounds, can he 
carry a boy that weighs 
above fifty?” 

“Why, replied the 
merchant, “do you 
make such a wonder at 
(hat? As if in a country 
where one rat can eat a 
hundred tons' weight 
of iron, it were such a 
wonder for an owl to 
carry a child that 
weighs not over fifty 
pounds in all!” The 
friend, upon this, found 
that the. merchant was 
no such fool as he took 
him to be, begged his 
pardon for the cheat 
which he designed to 
have put upon him, 
restored him the value 
of his iron, and so had 
his son again. 

FABLES, 

Filmy, 

India, 

FOURTH CENTURY 


When you have come 
to grips and are striv¬ 
ing together with the 
enemy, and you realize 
that you cannot 
advance, you "soak in" 
and become one with 
the enemy. You can win 
by applying a suitable 
technique while you 
are mutually entangled. 
... You can win often 
decisively with the 
advantage of knowing 
how to "soak” into the 
enemy, whereas, were 
you to draw apart, you 
would lose the chance 
to win. 

A BOOK OF FIVE RINGS, 

Miyamoto Musashi, 
Japan, 

SEVENTEENTH CENTURY 


LAW 44 


379 



THK KOX AM) 
I KK STORK 


One day Mr. Fox 
decided to fork out 
And invite old Mrs. 

Stork out. 
The dinner wasn t 
elaborate — 
Being habitually mean. 
He didn V go in for 
haute cuisine — 
In fact it consisted o f a 
shallow plate 
Of thin gruel. 
Within a minute 
Our joker had lapped 
his plate clean; 
Meanwhile his guest, 
fishing away with 
her beak, 
Got not a morsel in it. 
To pay him back for 
this cruel Practical 
joke, the stork invited 
The fox to dinner the 
following week. 
“/ should be 
delighted,” 
He replied; 
“ When it comes to 
friends / never stand 
upon pride. ” 
Punctually on the 
day he ran 
To his hostess's house 
and at once began 
Praising everything: 
“ What taste! What chic! 
And the food—done 
just to a turn!'’ 
Then sat down with a 
hearty appetite 
(Foxes are always 
ready to eat) 
And savored the deli¬ 
cious smell of meat, 
ft was minced meat and 
served—to serve 
him right !— 
In a long-necked, 
narrow-mouthed urn. 
The stork, easily 
stooping. 
Enjoyed her fill 
With her long bill; 
His snout, though. 


lieved Fouche was in secret contact with ministers of foreign countries, in¬ 
cluding Metternich of Austria. Afraid that his most valuable minister was 
betraying him to his enemies, Napoleon had to find out the truth before it 
was too late. He could not confront Fouche directly—in person the man 
was as slippery as an eel. He needed hard proof. 

This seemed to come in April, when the emperor's private police cap¬ 
tured a Viennese gentleman who had come to Paris to pass information on 
to Fouche. Ordering the man brought before him, Napoleon threatened to 
shoot him then and there unless he confessed; the man broke down and 
admitted he had given Fouche a letter from Metternich, written in invisible 
ink, arranging for a secret meeting of special agents in Basel. Napoleon ac¬ 
cordingly ordered one of his own agents to infiltrate this meeting. If Fouche 
was indeed planning to betray him, he would finally be caught red-handed 
and would hang. 

Napoleon waited impatiently for the agent’s return, but to his bewil¬ 
derment the agent showed up days later reporting that he had heard noth¬ 
ing that would implicate Fouche in a conspiracy. In fact it seemed that the 
other agents present suspected Fouche of double-crossing them , as if he 
were working for Napoleon all along. Napoleon did not believe this for an 
instant—Fouche had somehow outwitted him again. 

The following morning Fouche visited Napoleon, and remarked, “By 
the way, sire, I never told you that I had a letter from Metternich a few 
days ago; my mind was so full of things of greater moment. Besides, his 
emissary omitted to give me the powder needed to make the writing legi¬ 
ble. .. . Here at length is the letter.” Sure that Fouche was toying with him, 
Napoleon exploded, “You are a traitor, Fouche! I ought to have you 
hanged.” He continued to harangue Fouche, but could not fire him without 
proof. Fouche only expressed amazement at the emperor’s words, but in¬ 
wardly he smiled, for all along he had been playing a mirroring game. 
Interpretation 

Fouche had known for years that Napoleon kept on top of those around 
him by spying on them day and night. The minister had survived this game 
by having his own spies spy on Napoleon’s spies, thus neutralizing any ac¬ 
tion Napoleon might take against him. In the case of the meeting in Basel, 
he even turned the tables: Knowing about Napoleon’s double agent, he set 
it up so that it would appear as if Fouche were a loyal double agent too. 

Fouche gained power and flourished in a period of great tumult by 
mirroring those around him. During the French Revolution he was a radi¬ 
cal Jacobin; after the Terror he became a moderate republican; and under 
Napoleon he became a committed imperialist whom Napoleon ennobled 
and made the duke of Otranto. If Napoleon took up the weapon of digging 
up dirt on people, Fouche made sure he had the dirt on Napoleon, as well 
as on everyone else. This also allowed him to predict the emperor’s plans 
and desires, so that he could echo his boss’s sentiments before he had even 
uttered them. Shielding his actions with a mirror strategy, Fouche could 
also plot offensive moves without being caught in the act. 

This is the power of mirroring those around you. First, you give people 


380 LAW 44 



the feeling that you share their thoughts and goals. Second, if they suspect 
you have ulterior motives, the mirror shields you from them, preventing 
them from figuring out your strategy. Eventually this will infuriate and un¬ 
settle them. By playing the double, you steal their thunder, suck away their 
initiative, make them feel helpless. You also gain the ability to choose when 
and how to unsettle them—another avenue to power. And the mirror saves 
you mental energy: simply echoing the moves of others gives you the 
space you need to develop a strategy of your own. 


Observance II 

Early on in his career, the ambitious statesman and general Alcibiades of 
Athens (450-404 B.C.) fashioned a formidable weapon that became the 
source of his power. In every encounter with others, he would sense their 
moods and tastes, then carefully tailor his words and actions to mirror their 
inmost desires. He would seduce them with the idea that their values were 
superior to everyone else’s, and that his goal was to model himself on them 
or help them realize their dreams. Few could resist his chasm. 

The first man to fall under his spell was the philosopher Socrates. Al¬ 
cibiades represented the opposite of the Socratic ideal of simplicity and up¬ 
rightness: He lived lavishly and was completely unprincipled. Whenever 
he met Socrates, however, he mirrored the older man’s sobriety, eating 
simply, accompanying Socrates on long walks, and talking only of philoso¬ 
phy and virtue. Socrates was not completely fooled—he was not unaware 
of Alcibiades’ other life. But that only made him vulnerable to a logic that 
flattered him: Only in my presence, he felt, does this man submit to a virtu¬ 
ous influence; only I have such power over him. This feeling intoxicated 
Socrates, who became Alcibiades’ fervent admirer and supporter, one day 
even risking his own life to rescue the young man in battle. 

The Athenians considered Alcibiades their greatest orator, for he had 
an uncanny ability to tune in to his audience’s aspirations, and mirror their 
desires. He made his greatest speeches in support of die invasion of Sicily, 
which he thought would bring great wealth to Athens and limitless glory to 
himself. The speeches gave expression to young Adienians’ thirst to con¬ 
quer lands for themselves, rather than living off the victories of their ances¬ 
tors. But he also tailored his words to reflect older men’s nostalgia for the 
glory years when Athens led the Greeks against Persia, and then went on to 
create an empire. All Athens now dreamed of conquering Sicily; Alcibi¬ 
ades’ plan was approved, and he was made the expedition’s commander. 

While Alcibiades was leading the invasion of Sicily, however, certain 
Athenians fabricated charges against him of profaning sacred statues. He 
knew his enemies would have him executed if he returned home, so at the 
last minute he deserted the Athenian fleet and defected to Athens’s bitter 
enemy, Sparta. The Spartans welcomed this great man to their side, but 
they knew his reputation and were wary of him. Alcibiades loved luxury; 
the Spartans were a warrior people who worshipped austerity, and they 
were afraid he would corrupt their youth. But much to their relief, the Al~ 


being the wrong 
shape and size. 

He had to return to 
his den 

Empty-bellied, tail 
dragging, ears 
drooping, 

As red in the face as a 
fox who's been caught 
by a hen. 

SELECTED l-'AHLES, 

Jean de La Fontaine, 
1621-1695 


the, mu.onsKj) 
LKTTKtt 

When / wish to find out 
how wise, or how 
stupid, or how good, or 
how wicked is any one, 
or what are his 
thoughts at the 
moment, l fashion the 
expression of my face, 
as accurately as possi¬ 
ble, in accordance with 
(he expression of his, 
and then wait to see 
what thoughts or senti¬ 
ments arise in my mind 
or heart, as if to match 
or correspond with the 
expression. 

Edgar Allan Poe, 
1.809-1849 


LAW 44 381 



I.OKKNZO !>}•'.' MKIMCI 
SKMLFS TtiK 1*01* K 

Lorenzo file.' Medic if 
lost no opportunity of 
increasing ike respect 
which Pope Innocent 
now felt for him and of 
gaining his friendship, 
if possible his affection. 
He took the trouble to 
discover the Pope s 
tastes and indulged 
them accordingly. He 
sent him . .. casks of 
his favourite wine.... 
He sent him courteous. 

flattering letters in 
which he assured him, 
when the Pope was ill, 
that he felt his suffer¬ 
ings as though they 
were his own, in which 
he encouraged him 
with such fortifying 
statements as “a Pope 
is what he wills to be, ” 
and in which, as 
though incidentally, he 
included his views on 
the proper course of 
papal policies. Innocent 
wax gratified by 
Lorenzos attentions 
and convinced by his 
arguments ... So 
completely, indeed, did 
he come to share his 
opinions that, as the 
disgruntled Ferrarc.se 
ambassador put it, 
“the Pope sleeps with 
the eyes of the Magnifi¬ 
cent Lorenzo 

THE HOUSE 
OF MEDICI; 
ns RISE AND FALL, 

Christopher Hibbert, 
1980 


382 LAW 44 


cibiades who arrived in Sparta was not at all what they expected: He wore 
his hair untrixnmed (as they did), took cold baths, ate coarse bread and 
black broth, and wore simple clothes. To the Spartans this signified that he 
had come to see their way of life as superior to the Athenian; greater than 
they were, he had chosen to be a Spartan rather than being bom one, and 
should thus be honored above all others. They fell under his spell and 
gave him great powers. Unfortunately Alcibiades rarely knew how to 
rein in his charm—he managed to seduce the king of Sparta’s wife and 
make her pregnant When this became public he once more had to flee 
for his life. 

This time Alcibiades defected to Persia, where he suddenly went from 
Spartan simplicity to embracing the lavish Persian lifestyle down to the last 
detail. It was of course immensely flattering to the Persians to see a Greek 
of Alcibiades’ stature prefer their culture over his own, and they showered 
him with honors, land, and power. Once seduced by the mirror, they failed 
to notice that behind this shield Alcibiades was playing a double game, se¬ 
cretly helping the Athenians in their war with Sparta and thus reingratiat- 
ing himself with the city to which he desperately wanted to return, and 
which welcomed him back with open arms in 408 B.C. 

Interpretation 

Early in his political career, Alcibiades made a discovery that changed his 
whole approach to power: He had a colorful and forceful personality, but 
when he argued his ideas strongly with other people he would win over a 
few while at the same time alienating many more. The secret to gaining as¬ 
cendancy over large numbers, he came to believe, was not to impose his 
colors but to absorb the colors of those around him, like a chameleon. 
Once people fell for the trick, the deceptions he went on to practice would 
be invisible to them. 

Understand: Everyone is wrapped up in their own narcissistic shell. 
When you try to impose your own ego on them, a wall goes up, resistance 
is increased. By mirroring them, however, you seduce them into a kind of 
narcissistic rapture: They are gazing at a double of their own soul. This 
double is actually manufactured in its entirety by you. Once you have used 
the mirror to seduce them, you have great power over them. 

It is worth noting, however, the dangers in the promiscuous use of the 
mirror. In Alcibiades’ presence people felt larger, as if their egos had been 
doubled. But once he left, they felt empty and diminished, and when they 
saw him mirroring completely different people as totally as he had mir¬ 
rored them, they felt not just diminished but betrayed. Alcibiades’ overuse 
of the Mirror Effect made whole peoples feel used, so that he constantly 
had to flee from one place to another. Indeed Alcibiades so angered the 
Spartans that they finally had him murdered. He had gone too far. The Se¬ 
ducer's Mirror must be used with caution and discrimination. 

Observance III 

In 1652 the recently widowed Baroness Mancini moved her family from 
Rome to Paris, where she could count on the influence and protection of 




her brother Cardinal Mazarin, the French prime minister. Of the 
baroness’s five daughters, four dazzled the court with their beauty and high 
spirits. These infamously charming nieces of Cardinal Mazarin became 
known as the Mazarinettes, and soon found themselves invited to all the 
most important court functions. 

One daughter, Marie Mancini, did not share this good fortune, for she 
lacked the beauty and grace of her sisters—who, along with her mother 
and even Cardinal Mazarin, eventually came to dislike her, for they felt 
she spoiled the family image. They tried to persuade her to enter a con¬ 
vent, where she would be less of an embarrassment, but she refused. In¬ 
stead she applied herself to her studies, learning Latin and Greek, 
perfecting her French, and practicing her musical skills. On the rare occa¬ 
sions when the family would let her attend court affairs, she trained herself 
to be an artful listener, sizing people up for their weaknesses and hidden 
desires. And when she finally met die future King Louis XIV, in 1657 
(Louis was seventeen years old, Marie eighteen), she decided that to spite 
her family and unde, she would find a way to make this young man fall in 
love with her. 

This was a seemingly impossible task for such a plain-looking girl, but 
Marie studied the future king closely. She noticed that her sisters’ frivolity 
did not please him, and she sensed that he loathed the scheming and petty 
politicking that went on all around him. She saw that he had a romantic na¬ 
ture—he read adventure novels, insisted on marching at the head of his 
armies, and had high ideals and a passion for glory. The court did not feed 
these fantasies of his; it was a banal, superficial world that bored him. 

The key to Louis’s heart, Marie saw, would be to construct a mirror re¬ 
flecting his fantasies and his youthful yearnings for glory and romance. To 
begin with she immersed herself in the romantic novels, poems, and plays 
that she knew the young king read voraciously. When Louis began to en¬ 
gage her in conversation, to his delight she would talk of the things that 
stirred his soul—not this fashion or that piece of gossip, but rather courtly 
love, the deeds of great knights, the nobility of past kings and heroes. She 
fed his thirst for glory by creating an image of an august, superior king 
whom he could aspire to become. She stirred his imagination. 

As the future Sun King spent more and more time in Marie’s presence, 
it eventually became dear that he had fallen in love with the least likely 
young woman of the court. To the horror of her sisters and mother, he 
showered Marie Mancini with attention. He brought her along on his mili¬ 
tary campaigns, and made a show of stationing her where she could watch 
as he marched into battle. He even promised Marie that he would marry 
her and make her queen. 

Mazarin, however, would never allow the king to marry his niece, a 
woman who could bring France no diplomatic or royal alliances. Louis had 
to marry a princess of Spain or Austria. In 1658 Louis succumbed to the 
pressure and agreed to break off the first romantic involvement of his life. 
He did so with much regret, and at the end of his life he acknowledged that 
he never loved anyone as much as Marie Mancini. 


Wittgenstein had an 
extraordinary gift for 
divining (he thoughts 
of the person with 
whom he was engaged 
in discussion. While the 
other struggled to put 
his thought into words, 
Wittgenstein would 
perceive what it was 
and state it for him. 

This power of his, 
which sometimes 
seemed uncanny , was 
made possible , l am 
sure, by his own 
prolonged and continu¬ 
ous researches. 

L UD Wl G W r r T< > BN,ST FIN: 
A MEMOIR, 

N ORMAN M A LCO CM, 
1958 


The doctor should be 
opaque to his patients, 
and like a mirror, 
should show them 
nothing hut what is 
shown to him. 

Sigmund Freud, 
1856-1939 


LAW 44 


383 



Interpretation 

Marie Mancini played the seducer’s game to perfection. First, she took a 
step back, to study her prey. Seduction often fails to get past the first step 
because it is too aggressive; the first move must always be a retreat. By 
studying the king from a distance Marie saw what distinguished him from 
others—his high ideals, romantic nature, and snobbish disdain for petty 
politics. Marie’s next step was to make a mirror for these hidden yearnings 
on Louis’s part, letting him glimpse what he himself could be—a godlike 
king! 

This mirror had several functions: Satisfying Louis’s ego by giving him 
a double to look at, it also focused on him so exclusively as to give him the 
feeling that Marie existed for him alone. Surrounded by a pack of schem¬ 
ing courtiers who only had their own self-interest at heart, he could not fail 
to be touched by this devotional focus. Finally Marie’s mirror set up an 
ideal for him to live up to: the noble knight of the medieval court. To a soul 
both romantic and ambitious, nothing could be more intoxicating than to 
have someone hold up an idealized reflection of him. In effect it was Marie 
Mancini who created the image of the Sun King—indeed Louis later ad¬ 
mitted the enormous part she had played in fashioning his radiant self- 
image. 

This is the power of the Seducer’s Mirror: By doubling the tastes and 
ideals of the target, it shows your attention to his or her psychology, an at¬ 
tention more charming than any aggressive pursuit. Find out what sets the 
other person apart, then hold up the mirror that will reflect it and bring it 
out of them. Feed their fantasies of power and greatness by reflecting their 
ideals, and they will succumb. 

Observance IV 

In 1538, with the death of his mother, Helena, the eight-year-old future 
czar Ivan IV (or Ivan the Terrible) of Russia became an orphan. For the 
next five years he watched as the princely class, the boyars, terrorized the 
country. Now and then, to mock the young Ivan, they would make him 
wear a crown and scepter and place him on the throne. When the little 
boy’s feet dangled over the edge of the chair, they would laugh and lift him 
off it, handing him from man to man in the air, making him feel his help¬ 
lessness compared to them. 

When Ivan was thirteen, he boldly murdered the boyar leader and as¬ 
cended to the throne. For the next few decades he struggled to subdue the 
boyars’ power, but they continued to defy him. By 1575 his efforts to trans¬ 
form Russia and defeat its enemies had exhausted him. Meanwhile, his 
subjects were complaining bitterly about his endless wars, his secret police, 
the unvanquished and oppressive boyars. His own ministers began to ques¬ 
tion his moves. Finally he had had enough. In 1564 he had temporarily 
abandoned the throne, forcing his subjects to call him back to power. Now 
he took the strategy a step further, and abdicated. 

To take his place Ivan elevated a general of his, Simeon Bekbulatovich, 



to the throne. But although Simeon had recently converted to Christianity, 
he was by birth a Tartar, and his enthronement was an insult to Ivan’s sub¬ 
jects, since Russians looked down on the Tartars as inferiors and infidels. 
Yet Ivan ordered that all Russians, including the boyars, pledge obedience 
to their new ruler. And while Simeon moved into the Kremlin, Ivan lived 
in a humble house on Moscow’s outskirts, from which he would sometimes 
visit the palace, bow before the throne, sit among the other boyars, and 
humbly petition Simeon for favors. 

Over time it became clear that Simeon was a kind of king’s double. He 
dressed like Ivan, and acted like Ivan, but he had no real power, since no 
one would really obey him. The boyars at the court who were old enough 
to remember taunting Ivan when he was a boy, by placing him on the 
throne, saw the connection; They had made Ivan feel like a weak pre¬ 
tender, so now he mirrored them by placing a weak pretender of his own 
on the throne. 

For two long years Ivan held the mirror of Simeon up to the Russian 
people. The mirror said: Your whining and disobedience have made me a 
czar with no real power, so I will reflect back to you a czar with no real 
power. You have treated me disrespectfully, so I will do the same to you, 
making Russia the laughingstock of the world. In 1577, in the name of the 
Russian people, the chastised boyars once again begged Ivan to return to 
the throne, which he did. He lived as czar until his death, in 1584, and the 
conspiracies, complaining, and second-guessing disappeared along with 
Simeon. 

Interpretation 

In 1564, after threatening to abdicate, Ivan had been granted absolute pow¬ 
ers. But these powers had slowly been chipped away as every sector of so¬ 
ciety—the boyars, the church, the government—vied for more control. 
Foreign wars had exhausted the country, internal bickering had increased, 
and Ivan’s attempts to respond had been met with scorn. Russia had turned 
into a kind of boisterous classroom in which the pupils laughed openly at 
the teacher. If he raised his voice or complained, he only met more resis¬ 
tance. He had to teach them a lesson, give them a taste of their own medi¬ 
cine. Simeon Bekbulatovich was the mirror he used to do so. 

After two years in which the throne had been an object of ridicule and 
disgust, the Russian people learned their lesson. They wanted their czar 
back, conceding to him all the dignity and respect that the position should 
always have commanded. For the rest of his reign, Russia and Ivan got 
along fine. 

Understand: People are locked in their own experiences. When you 
whine about some insensitivity on their part, they may seem to understand, 
but inwardly they are untouched and even more resistant. The goal of 
power is always to lower people’s resistance to you. For this you need 
tricks, and one trick is to teach them a lesson. 

Instead of haranguing people verbally, then, create a kind of mirror of 
their behavior. In doing so you leave them two choices: They can ignore 



you, or they can start to think about themselves. And even if they ignore 
you, you will have planted a seed in their unconscious that will eventually 
take root. When you mirror their behavior, incidentally, do not be afraid to 
add a touch of caricature and exaggeration, as Ivan did by enthroning a 
Tartar—it is the little spice in the soup that will open their eyes and make 
them see the ridiculousness in their own actions. 

Observance V 

Dr. Milton H. Erickson, a pioneer in strategic psychotherapy, would often 
educate his patients powerfully but indirectly by creating a kind of mirror 
effect. Constructing an analogy to make patients see the truth on their own, 
he would bypass their resistance to change. When Dr. Erickson treated 
married couples complaining of sexual problems, for instance, he often 
found that psychotherapy’s tradition of direct confrontation and problem¬ 
airing only heightened the spouses’ resistance and sharpened their differ¬ 
ences. Instead, he would draw a husband and wife out on other topics, 
often banal ones, trying to find an analogy for the sexual conflict. 

In one couple’s first session, the pair were discussing their eating 
habits, especially at dinner. The wife preferred the leisurely approach—a 
drink before the meal, some appetizers, and then a small main course, all at 
a slow, civilized pace. This frustrated the husband—he wanted to get din¬ 
ner over quickly and to dig right into the main course, the bigger the better. 
As the conversation continued, the couple began to catch glimpses of an 
analogy to their problems in bed. The moment they made this connection, 
however, Dr. Erickson would change the subject, carefully avoiding a dis¬ 
cussion of the real problem. 

The couple thought Erickson was just getting to know them and would 
deal with the problem directly the next time he saw them. But at the end of 
this first session, Dr. Erickson directed them to arrange a dinner a few 
nights away that would combine each person’s desire: The wife would get 
the slow meal, including time spent bonding, and the husband would get 
the big dishes he wanted to eat. Without realizing they were acting under 
the doctor’s gentle guidance, the couple would walk into a mirror of their 
problem, and in the mirror they would solve their problems themselves, 
ending the evening just as the doctor had hoped—by mirroring the im¬ 
proved dinner dynamics in bed. 

in dealing with more severe problems, such as the schizophrenic’s 
mirror fantasy world of his or her own construction, Dr. Erickson would al¬ 
ways try to enter the mirror and work within it. He once treated a hospital 
inmate who believed he was Jesus Christ—draping sheets around his 
body, talking in vague parables, and bombarding staff and patients with 
endless Christian proselytizing. No therapy or drugs seemed to work, until 
one day Dr. Erickson went up to the young man and said, “I understand 
you have had experience as a carpenter.” Being Christ, the patient had to 
say that he had had such experience, and Erickson immediately put him to 
work building bookcases and other useful items, allowing him to wear his 
Jesus garb. Over the next weeks, as the patient worked on these projects, 



his mind became less occupied with Jesus fantasies and more focused on 
his labor. As the carpentry work took precedence, a psychic shift took ef¬ 
fect: The religious fantasies remained, but faded comfortably into the back¬ 
ground, allowing the man to function in society. 

Interpretation 

Communication depends on metaphors and symbols, which are the basis 
of language itself. A metaphor is a kind of mirror to the concrete and real, 
which it often expresses more clearly and deeply than a literal description 
does. When you are dealing with the intractable willpower of other people, 
direct communication often only heightens their resistance. 

This happens most clearly when you complain shout people’s behav¬ 
ior, particularly in sensitive areas such as their lovemaking. You will effect 
a far more lasting change if, like Dr. Erickson, you construct an analogy, a 
symbolic mirror of the situation, and guide the other through it. As Christ 
himself understood, talking in parables is often the best way to teach a les¬ 
son, for it allows people to realize the truth on their own. 

When dealing with people who are lost in the reflections of fantasy 
worlds (including a host of people who do not live in mental hospitals), 
never try to push them into reality by shattering their mirrors. Instead, 
enter their world and operate inside it, under their rules, gently guiding 
them out of the hall of mirrors they have entered. 

Observance VI 

The great sixteenth-century Japanese tea master Takeno Sho-o once 
passed by a house and noticed a young man watering flowers near his front 
gate. Two things caught Sho-o’s attention—first, the graceful way the man 
performed his task; and, second, the stunningly beautiful rose of Sharon 
blossoms that bloomed in the garden. He stopped and introduced himself 
to the man, whose name was Sen no Rikyu. Sho-o wanted to stay, but he 
had a prior engagement and had to hurry off. Before he left, however, 
Rikyu invited him to take tea with him the following morning. Sho-o hap¬ 
pily accepted. 

When Sho-o opened the garden gate the next day, he was horrified to 
see that not a single flower remained. More than anything else, he had 
come to see the rose of Sharon blossoms that he had not had the time to ap¬ 
preciate the day before; now, disappointed, he started to leave, but at the 
gate he stopped himself, and decided to enter Sen no Rikyu’s tea room. Im¬ 
mediately inside, he stopped in his tracks and gazed in astonishment: Be¬ 
fore him a vase hung from the ceiling, and in the vase stood a single rose of 
Sharon blossom, the most beautiful in the garden. Somehow Sen no Rikyu 
had read his guest’s thoughts, and, with this one eloquent gesture, had 
demonstrated that this day guest and host would be in perfect harmony. 

Sen no Rikyu went on to become the most famous tea master of all, 
and his trademark was this uncanny ability to harmonize himself with his 
guests’ thoughts and to think one step ahead, enchanting them by adapting 
to their taste. 

One day Rikyu was invited to tea by Yamashina Hechigwan, an ad- 




rairer of the tea ceremony but also a man with a vivid sense of humor. 
When Rikyu arrived at Hechigwan’s home, he found the garden gate shut, 
so he opened it to look for the host. On the other side of the gate he saw 
that someone had first dug a ditch, then carefully covered it over with can¬ 
vas and earth. Realizing that Hechigwan had planned a practical joke, he 
obligingly walked right into the ditch, muddying his clothes in the process. 

Apparently horrified, Hechigwan came running out, and hurried 
Rikyu to a bath that for some inexplicable reason stood already prepared. 
After bathing, Rikyu joined Hechigwan in the tea ceremony, which both 
enjoyed immensely, sharing a laugh about the accident. Later Sen no 
Rikyu explained to a friend that he had heard about Hechigwan’s practical 
joke beforehand, “But since it should always be one’s aim to conform to 
the wishes of one’s host, I fell into die hole knowingly and thus assured the 
success of the meeting. Tea is by no means mere obsequiousness, but there 
is no tea where the host and guest are not in harmony with one another.” 
Hechigwan’s vision of the dignified Sen no Rikyu at the bottom of a ditch 
had pleased him endlessly, but Rikyu had gained a pleasure of his own 
in complying with his host’s wish and watching him amuse himself in 
this way. 

Interpretation 

Sen no Rikyu was no magician or seer—he watched those around him 
acutely, plumbing the subtle gestures that revealed a hidden desire, then 
producing that desire’s image. Although Sho-o never spoke of being en¬ 
chanted by the rose of Sharon blossoms, Rikyu read it in his eyes. If mir¬ 
roring a person’s desires meant falling into a ditch, so be it. Rikyu’s power 
resided in his skillful use of the Courtier’s Mirror, which gave him the ap¬ 
pearance of an unusual ability to see into other people. 

Learn to manipulate the Courtier’s Mirror, for it will bring you great 
power. Study people’s eyes, follow their gestures—surer barometers of pain 
and pleasure than any spoken word. Notice and remember the details—the 
clothing, the choice of friends, the daily habits, the tossed-out remarks— 
that reveal hidden and rarely indulged desires. Soak it all in, find out what 
lies under the surface, then make yourself the mirror of their unspoken 
selves. That is the key to this power; The other person has not asked for 
your consideration, has not mentioned his pleasure in the rose of Sharon, 
and when you reflect it back to him his pleasure is heightened because it is 
unasked for. Remember; The wordless communication, the indirect com¬ 
pliment, contains the most power. No one can resist the enchantment of the 
Courtier’s Mirror. 

Observance VII 

Yellow Kid Weil, con artist extraordinaire, used the Deceiver’s Mirror in 
his most brilliant cons. Most audacious of all was his re-creation of a bank 
in Muncie, Indiana. When Weil read one day that the Merchants Bank in 
Muncie had moved, he saw an opportunity he could not pass up. 

Weil rented out the original Merchants building, which still contained 
bank furniture, complete with teller windows. He bought money bags, 



stenciled a bank’s invented name on them, filled them with steel washers, 
and arrayed them impressively behind the teller windows, along with bun¬ 
dles of boodle—real bills hiding newspaper cut to size. For his bank’s staff 
and customers Weil hired gamblers, bookies, girls from local bawdy 
houses, and other assorted confederates. He even had a local thug pose as a 
bank dick. 

Claiming to be the broker for a certificate investment the bank was of¬ 
fering, Weil would fish the waters and hook the proper wealthy sucker. He 
would bring this man to the bank and ask to see the president. An “officer” 
of the bank would tell them that they had to wait, which only heightened 
the realism of the con—one always has to wait to see the bank president. 
And as they waited the bank would bustle with banklike activity, as call 
girls and bookies in disguise floated in and out, making deposits and with 
drawals and tipping their hats to the phony bank dick. Lulled by this per¬ 
fect copy of reality, the sucker would deposit $50,000 into the fake bank 
without a worry in the world. 

Over the years Weil did the same thing with a deserted yacht club, an 
abandoned brokerage office, a relocated real estate office, and a com¬ 
pletely realistic gambling club. 

Interpretation 

The mirroring of reality offers immense deceptive powers. The right uni¬ 
form, the perfect accent, the proper props—the deception cannot be deci¬ 
phered because it is enmeshed in a simulation of reality. People have an 
intense desire and need to believe, and their first instinct is to trust a well- 
constructed facade, to mistake it for reality. After all, we cannot go around 
doubting the reality of everything we see—that would be too exhausting. 
We habitually accept appearances, and this is a credulity you can use. 

In this particular game it is the first moment that counts the most. If 
your suckers’ suspicions are not raised by their first glance at the mirror’s 
reflection, they will stay suppressed. Once they enter your hall of mirrors, 
they will be unable to distinguish the real from the fake, and it will become 
easier and easier to deceive them. Remember: Study the world’s surfaces 
and learn to mirror them in your habits, your manner, your clothes. Like a 
carnivorous plant, to unsuspecting insects you will look like all the other 
plants in the field. 


Authority: The task of a military operation is to accord decep¬ 
tively with the intentions of the enemy ... get to what they want 
first, subtly anticipate them. Maintain discipline and adapt to 
the enemy.... Thus, at first you are like a maiden, so the enemy 
opens his door; then you are like a rabbit oil the loose, so 
the enemy cannot keep you out. (Sun-tzu, fourth century b.C.) 




Image: The 
Shield of Perseus, It is pol¬ 
ished into a reflecting mirror. 
Medusa cannot see you, only her 
own hideousness reflected back at her. 
Behind such a mirror you can de¬ 
ceive, mock, and infuriate. With 
one blow you sever Medusa's 
unsuspecting head. 


A WARNING: BEWARE OF MIRRORED SITUATIONS 
Mirrors contain great power but also dangerous reefs, including the mir¬ 
rored situation—a situation that seems to reflect or closely resemble a pre¬ 
vious one, mostly in style and surface appearance. You can often back into 
such a situation without fully understanding it, while those around you un¬ 
derstand it quite well, and compare it and you to whatever happened be¬ 
fore. Most often you suffer by the comparison, seeming either weaker than 
the previous occupant of your position or else tainted by any unpleasant 
associations that person has left behind. 

In 1864 the composer Richard Wagner moved to Munich at the behest 
of Ludwig II, known variously as the Swan King or the Mad King of 
Bavaria. Ludwig was Wagner’s biggest fan and most generous patron. The 
strength of his support turned Wagner’s head—once established in Munich 
under the king’s protection, he would be able to say and do whatever he 
wanted. 

Wagner moved into a lavish house, which the king eventually bought 
for him. This house was but a stone’s throw from the former home of Lola 
Montez, the notorious courtesan who had plunged Ludwig II’s grandfather 
into a crisis that had forced him to abdicate. Warned that he could be in¬ 
fected by this association, Wagner only scoffed—-“I am no Lola Montez,” 
he said. Soon enough, however, the citizens of Munich began to resent the 
favors and money showered on Wagner, and dubbed him “the second 
Lola,” or “Lolotte.” He unconsciously began to tread in Lola’s footsteps— 
spending money extravagantly, meddling in matters beyond music, even 
dabbling in politics and advising the king on cabinet appointments. Mean¬ 
while Ludwig’s affection for Wagner seemed intense and undignified for a 
king—-just like his grandfather’s love for Lola Montez. 



Eventually Ludwig’s ministers wrote him a letter: “Your Majesty now 
stands at a fateful parting of the ways: you have to choose between the love 
and respect of your faithful people and the ‘friendship’ of Richard Wag¬ 
ner.” In December of 1865, Ludwig politely asked his friend to leave and 
never return. Wagner had inadvertently placed himself in Lola Montez’s 
reflection. Once there, everything he did reminded the stolid Bavarians of 
that dread woman, and there was nothing he could do about it. 

Avoid such association-effects like the plague. In a mirrored situation 
you have little or no control over the reflections and recollections that will 
be connected to you, and any situation beyond your control is dangerous. 
Even if the person or event has positive associations, you will suffer from 
not being able to live up to them, since the past generally appears greater 
than the present. If you ever notice people associating you with some past 
event or person, do everything you can to separate yourself from that 
memory and to shatter the reflection. 



LAW 


45 

PREACH THE NEED 
FOR CHANGE, BUT 
NEVER REFORM 
TOO MUCH AT ONCE 

JUDGMENT 

Everyone understands the need for change in the ab¬ 
stract, but on the day-to-day level people are creatures of 
habit. Too much innovation is traumatic, and will lead 
to revolt If you are new to a position of power, or an out¬ 
sider trying to build a power base, make a show of re¬ 
specting the old way of doing things. If change is 
necessary, make it feel like a gentle improvement on the 
past. 


392 



TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

Sometime in die early 1520s, King Henry VIII of England decided to di¬ 
vorce his wife, Catherine of Aragon, because she had failed to bear him a 
son, and because he had fallen in love with the young and comely Anne 
Boleyn, The pope, Clement VII, opposed the divorce, and threatened the 
king with excommunication. The king’s most powerful minister, Cardinal 
Wolsey, also saw no need for divorce—and his halfhearted support of the 
king cost him his position and soon his life. 

One man in Henry’s cabinet, Thomas Cromwell, not only supported 
him in his desire for a divorce but had an idea for realizing it: a complete 
break with the past. He convinced the king that by severing ties with Rome 
and making himself the head of a newly formed English church, he could 
divorce Catherine and marry Anne. By 1531 Henry saw this as the only so¬ 
lution. To reward Cromwell for his simple but brilliant idea, he elevated 
this son of a blacksmith to the post of royal councillor. 

By 1534 Cromwell had been named the king’s secretary, and as the 
power behind the throne he had become the most powerful man in Eng¬ 
land, But for him the break with Rome went beyond the satisfaction of the 
king’s carnal desires: He envisioned a new Protestant order in England, 
with the power of the Catholic Church smashed and its vast wealth in the 
hands of the king and the government. In that same year he initiated a 
complete survey of the churches and monasteries of England. And as it 
turned out, the treasures and moneys that the churches had accumulated 
over the centuries were far more than he had imagined; his spies and 
agents came back with astonishing figures. 

To justify his schemes, Cromwell circulated stories about the corrup¬ 
tion in the English monasteries, their abuse of power, their exploitation of 
the people they supposedly served. Having won Parliaments support for 
breaking up the monasteries, he began to seize their holdings and to put 
them out of existence one by one. At the same time, he began to impose 
Protestantism, introducing reforms in religious ritual and punishing those 
who stuck to Catholicism, and who now were called heretics. Virtually 
overnight, England was converted to a new official religion. 

A terror fell on the country. Some people had suffered under the 
Catholic Church, which before the reforms had been immensely powerful, 
but most Britons had strong ties to Catholicism and to its comforting ritu¬ 
als. They watched in horror as churches were demolished, images of the 
Madonna and saints were broken in pieces, stained-glass windows were 
smashed, and the churches’ treasures were confiscated. With monasteries 
that had succored die poor suddenly gone, the poor now flooded the 
streets. The growing ranks of the beggar class were further swelled by for¬ 
mer monks. On top of all this, Cromwell levied high taxes to pay for his ec¬ 
clesiastical reforms. 

In 1535 powerful revolts in the North of England threatened to topple 
Henry from his throne. By the following year he had suppressed the rebel¬ 
lions, but he had also begun to see the costs of Cromwell’s reforms. The 
king himself had never wanted to go tins far—he had only wanted a di- 


WHERE CHRISTMAS 
CAME FROM 
Celebrating the turn of 
the year is an ancient 
custom. The Romans 
celebrated the Saturna¬ 
lia, the festival of 
Saturn, god of the 
harvest, between 
December 17 and 23. It 
was the most cheerful 
festival of the year. Alt 
work and commerce 
stopped , and the streets 
were filled with crowds 
and a carnival atmos¬ 
phere. Slaves were 
temporarily freed, and 
the houses were deco¬ 
rated with laurel 
branches. People 
visited one another, 
bringing gifts of wax 
candles and little clay 
figurines. 

Long before the birth 
of Christ, the Jews cele¬ 
brated an eight-day 
Festival of Lights (at 
the same season f, and it 
is believed that the 
Germanic peoples held 
a great festival not only 
at midsummer but also 
at (he winter solstice, 
when they celebrated 
the rebirth of the sun 
and honored the great 
fertility gods Wo tan 
and Freyja, Donar 
(Thor) and Freyr. Even 
after the Emperor 
Constantine (A. o. 
30&-337) declared 
Christianity to be 
Rome's official impe¬ 
rial religion, the evoca¬ 
tion of light and 
fertility as an important 
component of pre- 
Christian midwinter 
celebrations could not 
he entirely suppressed. 
In the year 274 the 
Roman Emperor Aure- 
liari (A.D, 214-275) had 
established an official 


LAW 45 


393 



cull of the sun-god 
Mithras , declaring his 
birthday, December 25, 
a national holiday. The 
cult of Mithras, the 
Aryan god of light, had 
spread from Persia 
through Asia Minor to 
Greece, Rome, and as 
far as the Germanic 
lands and Britain. 
Numerous ruins of his 
shrines still testify to 
the high regard in 
which this god was 
held, especially by the 
Roman legions, as a 
b ringer of fertility, 
peace, and victory. 
So it was a clever move 
when, in the year a.d. 
354, the Christian 
church under Pope 
Liberius (352-366) co¬ 
opted the birthday of 
Mithras and declared 
December 25 to be 
the birthday 
of Jesus Christ. 

NEUE ZURCHER 
ZEITUNG, 

Anne-Susanne 
Rischke, 
December 25, 1983 


394 \ LAW 45 


vorce. It was now Cromwell’s turn to watch uneasily as the king began 
slowly to undo his reforms, reinstating Catholic sacraments and other ritu¬ 
als that Cromwell had outlawed. 

Sensing his fall from grace, in 1540 Cromwell decided to regain 
Henry’s favor with one throw of the dice: He would find the king a new 
wife. Henry’s third wife, Jane Seymour, had died a few years before, and 
he had been pining for a new young queen. It was Cromwell who found 
him one: Anne of Cleves, a German princess and, most important to 
Cromwell, a Protestant. On Cromwell’s commission, the painter Holbein 
produced a flattering portrait of Anne; when Henry saw it, he fell in love, 
and agreed to marry her. Cromwell seemed back in favor. 

Unfortunately, however, Holbein’s painting was highly idealized, and 
when the king finally met the princess she did not please him in the least 
His anger against Cromwell—first for the ill-conceived reforms, now for 
saddling him with an unattractive and Protestant wife—could no longer be 
contained. In June of that year, Cromwell was arrested, charged as a Protes¬ 
tant extremist and a heretic, and sent to the Tower. Six weeks later, before a 
large and enthusiastic crowd, the public executioner cut off his head. 

Interpretation 

Thomas Cromwell had a simple idea: He would break up the power and 
wealth of the Church and lay the foundation for Protestantism in England. 
And he would do this in a mercilessly short time. He knew his speedy re¬ 
forms would cause pain and resentment, but he thought these feelings 
would fade in a few years. More important, by identifying himself with 
change, he would become the leader of the new order, making the king de¬ 
pendent on him. But there was a problem in his strategy: Like a billiard 
ball hit too hard against the cushion, his reforms had reactions and caroms 
he did not envision and could not control. 

The man who initiates strong reforms often becomes the scapegoat for 
any kind of dissatisfaction. And eventually the reaction to his reforms may 
consume him, for change is upsetting to the human animal, even when it is 
for the good. Because the world is and always has been full of insecurity 
and threat, we latch on to familiar faces and create habits and rituals to 
make the world more comfortable. Change can be pleasant and even 
sometimes desirable in the abstract, but too much of it creates an anxiety 
that will stir and boil beneath the surface and then eventually erupt. 

Never underestimate the hidden conservatism of those around you. It 
is powerful and entrenched. Never let the seductive charm of an idea cloud 
your reason: Just as you cannot make people see the world your way, you 
cannot wrench them into the future with painful changes. They will rebel. 
If reform is necessary, anticipate the reaction against it and find ways to 
disguise the change and sweeten the poison. 

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

As a young Communist in the 1920s, Mao Tse-tung understood better than 
any of his colleagues the incredible odds against a Communist victory in 




China. With their small numbers, limited funds, lack of military experi¬ 
ence, and small arsenal of weapons, the Party had no hope of success un¬ 
less it won over China’s immense peasant population. But who in the 
world was more conservative, more rooted in tradition, than the Chinese 
peasantry? The oldest civilization on the planet had a history that would 
never loosen its power, no matter how violent the revolution. The ideas of 
Confucius remained as alive in the 1920s as they had been in the sixth cen¬ 
tury B.C., when the philosopher was alive. Despite the oppressions of the 
current system, would the peasantry ever give up the deep-rooted values of 
the past for the great unknown of Communism? 

The solution, as Mao saw it, involved a simple deception: Cloak the 
revolution in the clothing of the past, making it comforting and legitimate 
in people’s eyes. One of Mao’s favorite books was the very popular me¬ 
dieval Chinese novel The Water Margin , which recounts the exploits of a 
Chinese Robin Hood and his robber band as they struggle against a cor¬ 
rupt and evil monarch. In China in Mao’s time, family ties dominated over 
any other kind, for the Confucian hierarchy of father and oldest son re¬ 
mained firmly in place; but The Water Margin preached a superior value— 
the fraternal ties of the band of robbers, the nobility of the cause that unites 
people beyond blood. The novel had great emotional resonance for Chi¬ 
nese people, who love to root for the underdog. Time and again, then, 
Mao would present his revolutionary army as an extension of the robber 
band in The Water Margin , likening his struggle to the timeless conflict be¬ 
tween the oppressed peasantry and an evil emperor. He made the past 
seem to envelop and legitimize the Communist cause; the peasantry could 
feel comfortable with and even support a group with such roots in the past. 

Even once the Party came to power, Mao continued to associate it with 
the past. He presented himself to the masses not as a Chinese Lenin but as 
a modem Chuko Xiang, the real-life third-century strategist who figures 
prominently in the popular historical novel The Romance of the Three King¬ 
doms. Liang was more than a great general—he was a poet, a philosopher, 
and a figure of stem moral rectitude. So Mao represented himself as a poet- 
warrior like Liang, a man who mixed strategy with philosophy and 
preached a new ethics. He made himself appear like a hero from the great 
Chinese tradition of warrior statesmen. 

Soon, everything in Mao’s speeches and writings had a reference to an 
earlier period in Chinese history. He recalled, for example, the gr eat Em¬ 
peror Ch’in, who had unified the country in the third century B.C. Ch’in 
had burned the works of Confucius, consolidated and completed the build¬ 
ing of the Great Wall, and given his name to China. like Ch’in, Mao also 
had brought the country together, and had sought bold reforms against an 
oppressive past. Ch’in had traditionally been seen as a violent dictator 
whose reign was short; the brilliance of Mao’s strategy was to turn this 
around, simultaneously reinterpreting Ch’in, justifying his rule in the eyes 
of present-day Chinese, and using him to justify the violence of the new 
order that Mao himself was creating. 

After the failed Cultural Revolution of the late 1960s, a power stmggle 



emerged in the Communist Party in which Mao's main foe was Lin Piao, 
once a close friend of his. To make clear to the masses die difference be¬ 
tween his philosophy and Lin’s, Mao once again exploited the past: He 
cast his opponent as representing Confucius, a philosopher Lin in fact 
would constantly quote. And Confucius signified the conservatism of the 
past Mao associated himself, on the other hand, with the ancient philo¬ 
sophical movement known as Legalism, exemplified by the writings of 
Han-fei-tzu. The Legalists disdained Confucian ethics; they believed in the 
need for violence to create a new order. They worshiped power. To give 
himself weight in the struggle, Mao unleashed a nationwide propaganda 
campaign against Confucius, using the issues of Confucianism versus Le¬ 
galism to whip the young into a kind of frenzied revolt against the older 
generation. This grand context enveloped a rather banal power struggle, 
and Mao once again won over the masses and triumphed over his enemies. 

Interpretation 

No people had a more profound attachment to the past than the Chinese. 
In the face of this enormous obstacle to reform, Mao’s strategy was simple: 
Instead of struggling against the past, he turned it to his advantage, associ¬ 
ating his radical Communists with the romantic figures of Chinese history. 
Weaving the story of the War of the Three Kingdoms into the struggle be¬ 
tween the United States, the Soviet Union, and China, he cast himself as 
Chuko Liang. As the emperors had, he welcomed the cultlike adoration of 
the masses, understanding that the Chinese could not function without 
some kind of father figure to admire. And after he made a terrible blunder 
with the Great Leap Forward, trying to force modernization on the country 
and failing miserably, he never repeated his mistake: From then on, radical 
change had to be cloaked in the comfortable clothes of the past. 

The lesson is simple: The past is powerful. What has happened before 
seems greater; habit and history give any act weight. Use this to your ad¬ 
vantage. When you destroy the familiar you create a void or vacuum; peo¬ 
ple fear the chaos that will flood in to fill it. You must avoid stirring up such 
fears at all cost. Borrow the weight and legitimacy from the past, however 
remote, to create a comforting and familiar presence. This will give your 
actions romantic associations, add to your presence, and cloak the nature 
of the changes you are attempting. 

It must be considered that there is nothing more difficult to carry out , 
nor more do ubtful of success, nor more dangerous to handle, 
than to initiate a new order of things. 

Niccoto Machiavelli, 1469-1527 


KEYS TO POWER 

Human psychology contains many dualities, one of them being that even 
while people understand the need for change, knowing how important it is 
for institutions and individuals to be occasionally renewed, they are also ir- 



ritated and upset by changes that affect them personally. They know that 
change is necessary, and that novelty provides relief from boredom, but 
deep inside they cling to the past. Change in the abstract, or superficial 
change, they desire, but a change that upsets core habits and routines is 
deeply disturbing to them. 

No revolution has gone without a powerful later reaction against it, for 
in the long run the void it creates proves too unsettling to the human ani¬ 
mal, who unconsciously associates such voids with death and chaos. The 
opportunity for change and renewal seduces people to the side of the revo¬ 
lution, but once their enthusiasm fades, which it will, they are left with a 
certain emptiness. Yearning for the past, they create an opening for it to 
creep back in. 

For Machiaveili, the prophet who preaches and brings change can 
only survive by taking up arms; When the masses inevitably yearn for the 
past, he must be ready to use force. But the armed prophet cannot last long 
unless he quickly creates a new set of values and rituals to replace the old 
ones, and to soothe the anxieties of those who dread change. It is far easier, 
and less bloody, to play a kind of con game. Preach change as much as you 
like, and even enact your reforms, but give them the comforting appear¬ 
ance of older events and traditions. 

Reigning from A.D. 8 to A.D. 23, the Chinese emperor Wang Mang 
emerged from a period of great historical turbulence in which the people 
yearned for order, an order represented for them by Confucius. Some two 
hundred years earlier, however. Emperor Ch’in had ordered the writings 
of Confucius burned. A few years later, word had spread that certain texts 
had miraculously survived, hidden under the scholar's house. These texts 
may not have been genuine, but they gave Wang his opportunity; He first 
confiscated them, then had his scribes insert passages into them that 
seemed to support the changes he had been imposing on the country. 
When he released the texts, it seemed that Confucius sanctioned Wang’s 
reforms, and the people felt comforted and accepted them more easily. 

Understand: The fact that the past is dead and buried gives you the 
freedom to reinterpret it. To support your cause, tinker with the facts. The 
past is a text in which you can safely insert your own lines. 

A simple gesture like using an old title, or keeping the same number 
for a group, will tie you to the past and support you with the authority of 
history. As Machiaveili himself observed, the Romans used this device 
when they transformed their monarchy into a republic. They may have in¬ 
stalled two consuls in place of the king, but since the king had been served 
by twelve lictors, they retained the same number to serve under the con¬ 
suls. The king had personally performed an annual sacrifice, in a great 
spectacle that stirred the public; the republic retained this practice, only 
transferring it to a special “chief of the ceremony, whom they called the 
King of the sacrifice.” These and similar gestures satisfied the people and 
kept them from clamoring for the monarchy’s return. 

Another strategy to disguise change is to make a loud and public dis¬ 
play of support for the values of the past. Seem to be a zealot for tradition 



and few will notice how' unconventional you really are. Renaissance Flo¬ 
rence had a centuries-old republic, and was suspicious of anyone who 
flouted its traditions. Costmo de ! Medici made a show of enthusiastic sup¬ 
port for the republic, while in reality he worked to bring the city under the 
control of his wealthy family. In form, the Medicis retained the appearance 
of a republic; in substance, they rendered it powerless. They quietly en¬ 
acted a radical change, while appearing to safeguard tradition. 

Science claims a search for truth that would seem to protect it from 
conservatism and the irrationality of habit: It is a culture of innovation. Yet 
when Charles Darwin published his ideas of evolution, he faced fiercer op¬ 
position from his fellow scientists than from religious authorities. His theo¬ 
ries challenged too many fixed ideas. Jonas Salk ran into the same wall 
with his radical innovations in immunology, as did Max Planck with his 
revolutionizing of physics. Planck later wrote of the scientific opposition he 
faced, M A new scientific truth does not triumph by convincingits opponents 
and making them see the light, but rather because its opponents eventually 
die, and a new generation grows up that is familiar with it.” 

The answer to this innate conservatism is to play the courtier’s game. 
Galileo did this at the beginning of his scientific career; he later became 
more confrontational, and paid for it So pay lip service to tradition. Iden¬ 
tify the elements in your revolution that can be made to seem to build on 
the past. Say the right things, make a show of conformity, and meanwhile 
let your theories do their radical work. Play with appearances and respect 
past protocol. This is true in every arena—science being no exception. 

Finally, powerful people pay attention to the Zeitgeist If their reform is 
too far ahead of its time, few will understand it, and it will stir up anxiety 
and be hopelessly misinterpreted. The changes you make must seem less 
innovative than they are. England did eventually become a Protestant na¬ 
tion, as Cromwell wished, but it took over a century of gradual evolution. 

Watch the Zeitgeist. If you work in a tumultuous time, there is power to 
be gained by preaching a return to the past, to comfort, tradition, and rit¬ 
ual. During a period of stagnation, on the other hand, play the card of re¬ 
form and revolution—but beware of what you stir up. Those who finish a 
revolution are rarely those who start it. You will not succeed at this danger¬ 
ous game unless you are willing to forestall the inevitable reaction against it 
by playing with appearances and building on the past. 


Authority: He who desires or attempts to reform the government of a 
state, and wishes to have it accepted, must at least retain the semblance of 
the old forms; so that it may seem to the people that there has been no 
change in the institutions, even though in fact they are entirely different 
from the old ones. For the great majority of mankind are satisfied with ap¬ 
pearances, as though they were realities. (Niccolo Machiavelli, 1469-1527) 



Image: The Cat. 

Creature of habit* it loves the 
warmth of the familiar. Upset its 
routines, disrupt its space, and it will 
grow unmanageable and psychotic. 
Placate it by supporting its rituals. If 
change is necessary, deceive the cat by 
keeping the smell of the past alive; 
place objects familiar to it in 
strategic locations. 


REVERSAL 

The past is a corpse to be used as you see fit. If what happened in the re¬ 
cent past was painful and harsh, it is self destructive to associate yourself 
with it. When Napoleon came to power, the French Revolution was fresh 
in everyone’s minds. If the court that he established had borne any resem¬ 
blance to the lavish court of Louis XVI and Marie-Antoinette, his courtiers 
would have spent all their time worrying about their own necks. Instead, 
Napoleon established a court remarkable for its sobriety and lack of osten¬ 
tation. It was the court of a man who valued work and military virtues. This 
new form seemed appropriate and reassuring. 

In other words, pay attention to the times. But understand: If you 
make a bold change from the past, you must avoid at all costs the appear¬ 
ance of a void or vacuum, or you will create terror. Even an ugly recent his¬ 
tory will seem preferable to an empty space. Fill that space immediately 
with new rituals and forms. Soothing and growing familiar, these will secure 
your position among the masses. 

Finally, the arts, fashion, and technology would seem to be areas in 
which power would come from creating a radical rupture with the past and 
appearing cutting edge. Indeed, such a strategy can bring great power, but 
it has many dangers. It is inevitable that your innovations will be outdone 
by someone else. You have little control—someone younger and fresher 
moves in a sudden new direction, making your bold innovation of yester¬ 
day seem tiresome and tame today. You are forever playing catch-up; your 
power is tenuous and short-lived. You want a power built on something 
more solid. Using the past, tinkering with tradition, playing with conven¬ 
tion to subvert it will give your creations something more than a momen¬ 
tary appeal. Periods of dizzying change disguise the fact that a yearning for 
the past will inevitably creep back in. In the end, using die past for your 
own purposes will bring you more power than trying to cut it out com¬ 
pletely—a futile and self-destructive endeavor. 


LAW 45 


399 




LAW 


46 

NEVER APPEAR 
TOO PERFECT 

JUDGMENT 

Appearing better than others is always dangerous, but 
most dangerous of all is to appear to have no faults or 
weaknesses. Envy creates silent enemies. It is smart to oc¬ 
casionally display defects, and admit to harmless vices, 
in order to deflect envy and appear more human and ap¬ 
proachable. Only gods and the dead can seem perfect 
with impunity. 



TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

Joe Orton met Kenneth Halliwell at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts, 
London, in 1953, where both had enrolled as acting students. They soon 
became lovers and moved in together. Halliwell, twenty-five at the time, 
was seven years older than Orton, and seemed the more confident of the 
two; but neither had much talent as actors, and after graduating, having set¬ 
tled down together in a dank London apartment, they decided to give up 
acting and collaborate as writers instead. HalliwelPs inheritance was 
enough to keep them from having to find work for a few years, and in the 
beginning, he was also the driving force behind the stories and novels they 
wrote; he would dictate to Orton, who would type the manuscripts, occa¬ 
sionally interjecting his own lines and ideas. Their first efforts attracted 
some interest from literary agents, but it sputtered. Hie promise they had 
shown was leading nowhere. 

Eventually the inheritance money ran out, and the pair had to look for 
work. Their collaborations were less enthusiastic and less frequent. The fu¬ 
ture looked bleak. 

In 1957 Orton began to write on his own, but it wasn’t until five years 
later, when the lovers were jailed for six months for defacing dozens of li¬ 
brary books, that he began to find his voice (perhaps not by chance: This 
was the first time he and Halliwell had been separated in nine years). He 
came out of prison determined to express his contempt for English society 
in the form of theatrical farces. He and Halliwell moved back in together, 
but now the roles were reversed: Orton did the writing while Halliwell put 
in comments and ideas. 

In 1964 Joe Orton completed his first full-length play. Entertaining Mr. 
Sloane . The play made it to London’s West End, where it received brilliant 
reviews: A great new writer had emerged from nowhere. Now success fol¬ 
lowed s access, at a dizzying pace. In 1966 Orton had a hit with his play 
Loot , and his popularity soared. Soon commissions came in from all sides, 
including from the Beatles, who paid Orton handsomely to write them a 
film script 

Everything was pointing upwards, everything except Orton’s relation¬ 
ship with Kenneth Halliwell. The pair still lived together, but as Orton 
grew successful, Halliwell began to deteriorate. Watching his lover become 
the center of attention, he suffered the humiliation of becoming a kind of 
personal assistant to the playwright, his role in what had once been a col¬ 
laboration growing smaller and smaller. In the 1950s he had supported 
Orton with his inheritance; now Orton supported him. At a party or 
among friends, people would naturally gravitate towards Orton—he was 
charming, and his mood was almost always buoyant Unlike the handsome 
Orton, Halliwell was bald and awkward; his defensiveness made people 
want to avoid him. 

With Orton’s success the couple’s problems only worsened. Halliwell’s 
moods made their life together impossible. Orton claimed to want to leave 
him, and had numerous affairs, but would always end up returning to his 


THK I’ARABf.t: OF THK 
CRKKOV MAN AND THK 
KN VIOLS MAN 
A greedy man and an 
envious man met a 
king. The king said to 
them, 'One of you may 
ask something of me 
and I will give it to 
him. provided / give 
twice as much to the 
other."' The envious 
person did not want to 
ask first for he was 
envious of his compan¬ 
ion who would receive 
twice as much, and the 
greedy man did not 
want to ask first since 
he wanted everything 
that was to he had. 
Finally the greedy one 
pressed the envious one 
to be the first to m ake 
the request. So the envi¬ 
ous person asked the 
king to pluck out one. 
of his eyes. 

Jewish parable. 

THE SEVEN DEADLY SINS, 

Solomon Schimmel, 
1992 


An admirer who feds 
that he cannot he 
happy by surrendering 
himself elects to 
become envious of that 
which he admires. So 
he speaks another 
language—the thing 
which he really admires 
is called a stupid, 
insipid and queer sort 
of thing. Admiration is 
happy self-surrender; 
envy is unhappy self- 
assertion. 

S$ren Kierkegaard. 
1813-1855 


LAW 46 | 401 



It takes great talent and 
skill to conceal one’s 
talent and skill. 

La Rochefchjcaulb. 

1613-1680 


MW V TO K MM MS 
AULAMHOS 

The goddess Minerva 
made her way to the 
house of Envy, a house 
filthy with dark and 
noisome slime. It is 
hidden away in the 
depths of the valleys, 
where the sun never 
penetrates, where no 
wind blows through; a 
gloomy dwelling, 
permeated by numbing 
chill, ever fireless, ever 
shrouded in thick dark¬ 
ness . When Minerva 
reached this spot she 
stopped in front of the 
house... and struck 
the doors with the tip 
of her spear, and at the 
blow they flew open 
and revealed Envy 
within, busy at a meal 
of snake’s flesh , the 
food on which she 
nourished her wicked¬ 
ness. At the sight, 
Minerva turned her 
eyes away. But the 
other rose heavily from 
the ground, leaving the 
half-eaten corpses, and 
came out with dragging 
steps. When she saw the 
goddess in all the bril¬ 
liance of her beauty . in 
her flashing armor, she 
groaned .... 
Envy’s face was sickly 
pale, her whole body 
lean and wasted, and 


old friend and lover. He tried to help Halliwell launch a career as an artist, 
even arranging for a gallery to show his work, but the show was a flop, and 
this only heightened Halliwell’s sense of inferiority. In May of 1967, the 
pair went on a brief holiday together in Tangier, Morocco. During the trip, 
Orton wrote in his diary, “We sat talking of how happy we felt And how it 
couldn’t, surely, last. We’d have to pay for it. Or we’d be struck down from 
afar by disaster because we were, perhaps, too happy. To be young, good- 
looking, healthy, famous, comparatively rich and happy is surely going 
against nature.” 

Halliwell outwardly seemed as happy as Orton. Inwardly, though, he 
was seething. And two months later, in the early morning of August 10, 
1967, just days after helping Orton put the finishing touches to the wicked 
fa 1 ce What the Butler Saw (undoubtedly his masterpiece), Kenneth Halliwell 
bludgeoned Joe Orton to death with repeated blows of a hammer to the 
head. He then took twenty-one sleeping pills and died himself, leaving be¬ 
hind a note that read, “If you read Orton’s diary all will be explained.” 

Interpretation 

Kenneth Halliwell had tried to cast his deterioration as mental illness, but 
what Joe Orton’s diaries revealed to him was the truth: It was envy, pure 
and simple, that lay at the heart of his sickness. The diaries, which Halli- 
well read on the sly, recounted the couple’s days as equals and their strug¬ 
gle for recognition. After Orton found success, the diaries began to 
describe HaUiwell’s brooding, his rude comments at parties, his growing 
sense of inferiority. All of this Orton narrated with a distance that bordered 
on contempt. 

The diaries made clear Halliwell’s bitterness over Orton’s success. 
Eventually the only thing that would have satisfied him would have been 
for Orton to have a failure of his own, an unsuccessful play perhaps, so that 
they could have commiserated in their failure, as they had done years be¬ 
fore. When the opposite happened—as Orton grew only more successful 
and popular—Halliwell did the only thing that would make them equals 
again: He made them equals in death. With Orton’s murder, he became al¬ 
most as famous as his friend—posthumously, 

Joe Orton only partly understood his lover’s deterioration. His attempt 
to help Halliwell launch a career in art registered for what it was: charity 
and guilt Orton basically had two possible solutions to the problem. He 
could have downplayed his own success, displaying some faults, deflecting 
HalliwelFs envy; or, once he realized the nature of the problem, he could 
have fled as if Halliwell were a viper, as in fact he was—a viper of envy. 
Once envy eats away at someone, everything you do only makes it grow, 
and day by day it festers inside him. Eventually he will attack. 

Only a minority can succeed at the game of life, and that minority in¬ 
evitably arouses the envy of those around them. Once success happens 
your way, however, the people to fear the most are those in your own cir¬ 
cle, the friends and acquaintances you have left behind. Feelings of inferi- 


402 


LAW 46 




ority gnaw at them; the thought of your success only heightens their feel¬ 
ings of stagnation. Envy, which the philosopher Kierkegaard calls “un¬ 
happy admiration,” takes hold. You may not see it but you will feel it 
someday—unless, that is, you learn strategies of deflection, little sacrifices 
to the gods of success. Either dampen your brilliance occasionally, pur¬ 
posefully revealing a defect, weakness, or anxiety, or attributing your suc¬ 
cess to luck; or simply find yourself new friends. Never underestimate the 
power of envy. 

OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

The merchant class and the craft guilds to which medieval Florence owed 
its prosperity had created a republic that protected them from oppression 
by the nobility. Since high office could only be held for a few months, no 
one could gain lasting dominance, and although this meant that the politi¬ 
cal factions struggled constantly for control, the system kept out tyrants 
and petty dictators. The Medici family lived for several centuries under this 
system without making much of a mark. They had modest origins as 
apothecaries, and were typical middle-class citizens. Not until the late four¬ 
teenth century, when Giovanni de’ Medici made a modest fortune in bank¬ 
ing, did they emerge as a force to be reckoned with. 

Upon Giovanni’s death, his son Cosimo took over the family business, 
and quickly demonstrated his talent for it. The business prospered under 
his control and the Medicis emerged as one of the preeminent banking 
families of Europe. But they had a rival in Florence: Despite the city’s re¬ 
publican system, one family, the Albizzis, had managed over the years to 
monopolize control of the government, forging alliances that allowed them 
to constantly fill important offices with their own men. Cosimo did not 
fight this, and in fact gave the Albizzis his tacit support At the same time, 
while the Albizzis were beginning to flaunt their power, Cosimo made a 
point of staying in the background. 

Eventually, however, the Medici wealth could not be ignored, and in 
1433, feeling threatened by the family, the Albizzis used their government 
muscle to have Cosimo arrested on charges of conspiring to overthrow the 
republic. Some in the Albizzi faction wanted Cosimo executed, others 
feared this would spark a civil war. In the end they exiled him from Flo¬ 
rence. Cosimo did not fight the sentence; he left quietly. Sometimes, he 
knew, it is wiser to bide one’s time and keep a low profile. 

Over the next year, the Albizzis began to stir up fears that they were 
setting up a dictatorship. Meanwhile, Cosimo, using his wealth to advan¬ 
tage, continued to exert influence on Florentine affairs, even from exile. A 
civil war broke out in the city, and in September of 1434 the Albizzis were 
toppled from power and sent into exile. Cosimo immediately returned to 
Florence, his position restored. But he saw that he now faced a delicate sit¬ 
uation: If he seemed ambitious, as the Albizzis had, he would stir up oppo¬ 
sition and envy that would ultimately threaten his business. If he stayed on 


she squinted horribly; 
her teeth were, discol¬ 
ored and decayed, her 
poisonous breast of a 
greenish hue , and her 
tongue dripped venom. 
Only the sight of 
suffering could bring a 
smile to her lips. She 
never knew the comfort 
of sleep, but was kept 
constantly awake by 
care and anxiety, 
looked with dismay on 
men’s good fortune, 
and grew thin at the 
sight. Gnawing at 
others, and being 
gnawed, she was herself 
her own torment. 
Minerva , in spite of her 
loathing, yet addressed 
her briefly: " Instil! your 
poison into one of 
Cecrop's daughters — 
her name is Aglauros. 
This is what ! require 
of you. ” Without 
another word she 
pushed against the 
ground with her spear, 
left the earth, and 
soared upwards. 

From the comer of her 
eye the other watched 
the goddess out of 
sight, muttering and 
angry that Minerva's 
plan should be success¬ 
ful. Then she took her 
staff, all encircled with 
thorny briars . wrapped 
hersel f in dark clouds, 
and set forth. Wherever 
she went she. trampled 
down the flowery fields, 
withered up the grass., 
seared the treetdps, and 
with her breath tainted 
the peoples, their cities 
and their homes, until 
at length she came to 
Athens, the home of wit 
and wealth, peaceful 
and prosperous. She 
could scarcely refrain 
from weeping when she 
saw no cause for tears. 


LAW 46 


403 



Then entering the 
chamber of Cecrop's 
daughter, she carried 
out Minerva V orders. 
She touched the girl's 
breast with a hand 
dipped in malice, filled 
her heart with spiky 
thorns, and breathing 
in a black and evil 
poison dispersed it 
through her very hones, 
instilling the venom 
deep in her heart. That 
the reason for her 
distress might not be 
far to seek, she set 
before Aglauros' eyes a 
vision of her sister ; of 
that sister's fortunate 
marriage /with the god 
Mercury }, and of the 
god in all his hand¬ 
someness; and she 
exaggerated the glory 
of it all. 
So Aglauros was 
tormented by such 
thoughts , and the jeal¬ 
ous anger she 
concealed ate into her 
heart. Day and night 
she sighed, unceasingly 
wretched, and in her 
utter misery wasted 
away in a stow decline, 
as when ice is melted 
by the fit fid sun. 
The fire that was 
kindled within her at 
the thought of her 
sister's luck and good 
fortune was like the 
burning of weeds 
which do not burst into 
flames, but are none the 
less consumed by 
smoldering fire. 
M ETA M O RP HO ST- S, 

Ovm, 43 B.C-c. a.d. 18 


the sidelines, on the other hand, he would leave an opening for another 
faction to rise up as the Albizzis had, and to punish the Medicis for their 
success. 

Cosimo solved the problem in two ways: He secretly used his wealth 
to buy influence among key citizens, and he placed his own allies, all clev¬ 
erly enlisted from the middle classes to disguise their allegiance to him, in 
top government positions. Those who complained of his growing political 
clout were taxed into submission, or their properties were bought out from 
under them by Cosimo’s banker allies. The republic survived in name 
only. Cosimo held the strings. 

While he worked behind the scenes to gain control, however, publicly 
Cosimo presented another picture. When he walked through the streets of 
Florence, he dressed modestly, was attended by no more than one ser¬ 
vant, and bowed deferentially to magistrates and elder citizens. He rode a 
mule instead of a horse. He never spoke out on matters of public import, 
even though he controlled Florence’s foreign affairs for over thirty years. 
He gave money to charities and maintained his ties to Florence’s merchant 
class. He financed all kinds of public buildings that fed the Florentines’ 
pride in their city. When he built a palace for himself and his family in 
nearby Fiesole, he turned down the ornate designs that Brunelleschi 
had drawn up for him and instead chose a modest structure designed by 
Michelozzo, a man of humble Florentine origins. The palace was a symbol 
of Cosimo’s strategy—all simplicity on the outside, all elegance and opu¬ 
lence within. 

Cosimo finally died in 1464, after ruling for thirty years. The citizens 
of Florence wanted to build him a great tomb, and to celebrate his memory 
with elaborate funeral ceremonies, but on his deathbed he had asked to be 
buried without “any pomp or demonstration.” Some sixty years later, 
Machiavelli hailed Cosimo as the wisest of all princes, “for he knew how 
extraordinary things that are seen and appear every hour make men much 
more envied than those that are done in deed and are covered over with 
decency.” 

Interpretation 

A close friend of Cosimo’s, the bookseller Vespasiano da Bisticci, once 
wrote of him, “And whenever he wished to achieve something, he saw to it, 
in order to escape envy as much as possible, that the initiative appeared to 
come from others, and not from him.” One of Cosimo’s favorite expres¬ 
sions was, “Envy is a weed that should not be watered.” Understanding the 
power envy has in a democratic environment, Cosimo avoided the appear¬ 
ance of greatness. This does not mean that greatness should be suffocated, 
or that only the mediocre should survive; only that a game of appearances 
must be played. The insidious envy of the masses can actually be deflected 
quite easily: Appear as one of them in style and values. Make alliances with 
those below you, and elevate them to positions of power to secure their 
support in times of need. Never flaunt your wealth, and carefully conceal 


404 


LAW 46 



the degree to which it has bought influence. Make a display of deferring to 
others, as if they were more powerful than you. Cosimo de ? Medici per¬ 
fected this game; he was a consummate con artist of appearances. No one 
could gauge the extent of his power—his modest exterior hid the truth. 

Never be so foolish as to believe that you are stirring up admiration by 
flaunting the qualities that raise you above others. By making others aware 
of their inferior position, you are only stirring up “unhappy admiration,” or 
envy, which will gnaw away at them until they undermine you in ways you 
cannot foresee. The fool dares the gods of envy by flaunting his victories. 
The master of power understands that the appearance of superiority over 
others is inconsequential next to the reality of it. 

Of all the disorders of the soul, envy is the only one no one confesses to. 

Plutarch, c. Ad). 46-120 


KEYS TO POWER 

The human animal has a hard time dealing with feelings of inferiority. In 
the face of superior skill, talent, or power, we are often disturbed and ill at 
ease; this is because most of us have an inflated sense of ourselves, and 
when we meet people who surpass us they make it clear to us that we are in 
fact mediocre, or at least not as brilliant as we had thought. This distur¬ 
bance in our self-image cannot last long without stirring up ugly emotions. 
At first we feel envy: If only we had the quality or skill of the superior per¬ 
son, we would be happy. But envy brings us neither comfort nor any closer 
to equality. Nor can we admit to feeling it, for it is frowned upon socially— 
to show envy is to admit to feeling inferior. To close friends, we may con¬ 
fess our secret unrealized desires, but we will never confess to feeling envy. 
So it goes underground. We disguise it in many ways, like finding grounds 
to criticize the person who makes us feel it: He may be smarter than I am, 
we say, but he has no morals or conscience. Or he may have more power, 
but that’s because he cheats. If we do not slander him, perhaps we praise 
him excessively—another of envy’s disguises. 

There are several strategies for dealing with the insidious, destructive 
emotion of envy. First, accept the fact that there will be people who will 
surpass you in some way, and also the fact that you may envy them. But 
make that feeling a way of pushing yourself to equal or surpass them some¬ 
day. Let envy turn inward and it poisons the soul; expel it outward and it 
can move you to greater heights. 

Second, understand that as you gain power, those below you will feel 
envious of you. They may not show it but it is inevitable. Do not naively ac¬ 
cept the facade they show you—read between the lines of their criticisms, 
their little sarcastic remarks, the signs of backstabbing, the excessive praise 
that is preparing you for a fall, the resentful look in the eye. Half the prob¬ 
lem with envy comes when we do not recognize it until it is too late. 

Finally, expect that when people envy you they will work against you 


The envious hides as 
carefully us the secret , 
lustful sinner and 
becomes the endless 
inventor of tricks and 
stratagems to hide and 
mask himself Thus he 
is able to pretend to 
ignore the superiority 
of others which eats up 
his heart , u,v if he did 
not see them, nor hear 
them, nor were aware 
of them, nor had ever 
heard of them, fie is a 
master simulator. On 
(he other hand he tries 
with all his power to 
connive and thus 
prevent any form of 
superiority from 
appearing in any situa¬ 
tion. And if they do, he 
casts on them obscu¬ 
rity. hypercriticism, 
sarcasm and calumny 
like the toad that spits 
poison from its hole. 
On the other hand he 
will raise endlessly 
insignificant men. 
mediocre people, and 
even the inferior in the 
same type of activities. 

Arthur 

Schopenhauer, 

1788-1860 


For not many men, the 
proverb says, can love a 
friend who fortune 
prospers without feel¬ 
ing envy; and about the. 
envious brain, cold 
poison clings and 
doubles all the pain life 
brings him , His own 
woundings he must 
nurse, and feels 
another's gladness 
like a curse. 

Aeschylus, 
c. 525-456 ac. 


LAW 46 


405 



JOShl'H AM) IliS ('OAT 

Now Israel loved 
Joseph mare than all 
his children, because he 
was the son of his old 
age; and he made him a 
coat of many colors... . 

And his brothers 
envied him.... And 
when they saw him afar 
off they conspired 
against him to slay 
him. And now they said 
to one another, 
“Behold , this dreamer 
comcth. Come now 
therefore, and let m 
slay him, and cast him 
into some pit, and we 
shall say, some evil 
beast hath devoured 
him; and we shall see 
what will become of his 
dreams. ” 
OLD TESTAMENT, 

genesis 37:3-20 


THE TRAGEDY 
OE THE TOMB 

/ When Pope Julius first 
saw Michelangelo's 
design for his tomb I it 
pleased him so much 
that he at once sent him 
to Carrara to quarry 
the necessary marbles, 
instructing Alamanno 
Salviati, of Florence , to 
pay him a thousand 
ducats for this purpose. 
Michelangelo stayed in 
these mountains more 
than eight months with 
two workmen and his 
horse, and without any 
other provision except 
food.... Enough 
marbles quarried and 
chosen, he took them to 
the sea-coast, and left 


insidiously. They will put obstacles in your path that you will not foresee, 
or that you cannot trace to their source. It is hard to defend yourself against 
this kind of attack. And by the time you realize that envy is at the root of a 
person’s feelings about you, it is often too late: 'Your excuses, your false hu¬ 
mility, your defensive actions, only exacerbate the problem. Since it is far 
easier to avoid creating envy in the first place than to get rid of it once it is 
there, you should strategize to forestall it before it grows. It is often your 
own actions that stir up envy, your own unawareness. By becoming con¬ 
scious of those actions and qualities that create envy, you can take the teeth 
out of it before it nibbles you to death. 

Kierkegaard believed that there are types of people who create envy, 
and are as guilty when it arises as those who feel it. The most obvious type 
we all know: The moment something good happens to them, whether by 
luck or design, they crow about it. In fact they get pleasure out of making 
people feel inferior. This type is obvious and beyond hope. There are oth¬ 
ers, however, who stir up envy in more subtle and unconscious ways, and 
are partly to blame for their troubles. Envy is often a problem, for exam¬ 
ple, for people with great natural talent. 

Sir Walter Raleigh was one of the most brilliant men at the court of 
Queen Elizabeth of England. He had skills as a scientist, wrote poetry still 
recognized as among the most beautiful writing of the time, was a proven 
leader of men, an enterprising entrepreneur, a great sea captain, and on 
top of all this was a handsome, dashing courtier who charmed his way into 
becoming one of the queen’s favorites. Wherever he went, however, peo¬ 
ple blocked his path. Eventually he suffered a terrific fall from grace, lead¬ 
ing even to prison and finally the executioner’s axe. 

Raleigh could not understand the stubborn opposition he faced from 
the other courtiers. He did not see that he had not only made no attempt to 
disguise the degree of his skills and qualities, he had imposed them on one 
and all, making a show of his versatility', thinking it impressed people and 
won him friends. In fact it made him silent enemies, people who felt infe¬ 
rior to him and did all they could to ruin him the moment he tripped up or 
made the slightest mistake. In the end, the reason he was executed was 
treason, but envy will use any cover it finds to mask its destructiveness. 

The envy elicited by Sir Walter Raleigh is the worst kind: It was in¬ 
spired by his natural talent and grace, which he felt was best displayed in 
its full flower. Money others can attain; power as well. But superior intelli¬ 
gence, good looks, charm—these are qualities no one can acquire. The nat¬ 
urally perfect have to work the most to disguise their brilliance, displaying 
a defect or two to deflect envy before it takes root. It is a common and 
naive mistake to think you are charming people with your natural talents 
when in fact they are coming to hate you. 

A great danger in the realm of power is the sudden improvement in for¬ 
tune—an unexpected promotion, a victory or success that seems to come 
out of nowhere. This is sure to stir up envy among your former peers. 

When Archbishop de Retz was promoted to the rank of cardinal, in 
1651, he knew full well that many of his former colleagues envied him. 


406 


LAW 46 




Understanding the foolishness of alienating those below him, de Retz did 
everything he could to downplay his merit and emphasize the role of luck 
in his success. To put people at ease, he acted humbly and deferentially, as if 
nothing had changed. (In reality, of course, he now had much more power 
than before.) He wrote that these wise policies “produced a good effect, by 
lessening the envy which was conceived against me, which is the greatest of 
aU secrets.” Follow de Retz’s example. Subtly emphasize how lucky you 
have been, to make your happiness seem more attainable to other people, 
and the need for envy less acute. But be careful not to affect a false modesty 
that people can easily see through. This will only make them more envious. 
The act has to be good; your humility, and your openness to those you have 
left behind, have to seem genuine. Any hint of insincerity will only make 
your new status more oppressive. Remember: Despite your elevated posi¬ 
tion, it will do you no good to alienate your former peers. Power requires a 
wide and solid support base, which envy can silently destroy. 

Political power of any kind creates envy, and one of the best ways to 
deflect it before it takes root is to seem unambitious. When Ivan the Terri¬ 
ble died, Boris Godunov knew he was the only one on the scene who could 
lead Russia. But if he sought the position eagerly, he would stir up envy 
and suspicion among the boyars, so he refused the crown, not once but 
several times. He made people insist that he take the throne. George Wash¬ 
ington used the same strategy to great effect, first in refusing to keep the po¬ 
sition of Commander in Chief of the American army, second in resisting 
the presidency. In both cases he made himself more popular than ever. 
People cannot envy the power that they themselves have given a person 
who does not seem to desire it. 

According to the Elizabethan statesman and writer Sir Francis Bacon, 
the wisest policy of the powerful is to create a kind of pity for themselves, 
as if their responsibilities were a burden and a sacrifice. How can one envy 
a man who has taken on a heavy load for the public interest? Disguise your 
power as a kind of self-sacrifice rather than a source of happiness and you 
make it seem less enviable. Emphasize your troubles and you turn a poten¬ 
tial danger (envy) into a source of moral support (pity). A similar ploy is to 
hint that your good fortune will benefit those around you. To do this you 
may need to open your purse strings, like Cimon, a wealthy general in an¬ 
cient Athens who gave lavishly in all kinds of ways to prevent people from 
resenting the influence he had bought in Athenian politics. He paid a high 
price to deflect their envy, but in the end it saved him from ostracism and 
banishment from the city. 

The painter J. M. W. Turner devised another way of giving to deflect 
the envy of his fellow artists, which he recognized as his greatest obstacle to 
his success. Noticing that his incomparable color skills made them afraid to 
hang their paintings next to his in exhibitions, he realized that their fear 
would turn to envy, and would eventually make it harder for him to find 
galleries to show in. On occasion, then, Turner is known to have temporar¬ 
ily dampened the colors in his paintings with soot to earn him the goodwill 
of his colleagues. 


one of his men to have 
them embarked. He 
himself returned to 
Rome. 

... The quantity of 
marbles was immense, 
so that, spread over the 
piazza, they were the 
admiration of all and a 
joy to the pope, who 
heaped unmeasurable 
favors upon Michelan¬ 
gelo; and when he 
began to work upon 
them again and again 
went to see him at his 
house, and talked to 
him about the tomb 
and other things as 
with his own brother. 
And in order that he 
might more easily go to 
him , the pope ordered 
that a drawbridge 
should be thrown 
across from the. Corri- 
dore to the rooms of 
Michelangelo, by which 
he. might visit him in 
private. 

These many and 
frequent favors were 
the cause (as often is 
the case at court) of 
much envy, and, after 
the envy, of endless 
persecution, since 
Bramante, the architect, 
who was loved by the 
pope, made him change 
his mind as to the 
monument by telling 
him, as is said by the 
vulgar, that it is 
unlucky to build ones 
tomb in one's lifetime, 
and other tales. Fear as 
well as envy stimulated 
Bramante, for the judg¬ 
ment of Michelangelo 
had exposed many of 
his errors.... Now 
because he had no 
doubt that Michelan¬ 
gelo knew these errors 
of his, he always sought 
to remove him from 
Rome, or, at least; to 
deprive him of the 


LAW 4.6 


407 



favor of (he pope , ami 
of the glory and useful¬ 
ness (hat he might have 
acquired by his indus¬ 
try. He succeeded in the 
matter of the tomb. 
There is no doubt that 
if Michelangelo had 
been allowed to finish 
it, according to his first 
design, having so large 
afield in which to show 
his worth, no other 
artist, however cele¬ 
brated (he it said with¬ 
out envy) could have 
wrested from him the 
high place he would 
have held. 
VITA D1 MICHELANGELO, 

Asoanio Condivi, 
1553 


Did ever anybody seri¬ 
ously confess to envy? 
Something there is in it 
universally fe.it to be 
more shameful than 
even felonious crime. 

And not only does 
everybody disown it, 
hut the better sort are 
inclined to incredulity 
when it is in earnest 
imputed to an intelli¬ 
gent man. But since 
lodgment is in the. heart 
not the brain . no degree 
of intellect supplies a 
guarantee against it. 

BILLY BUDD, 

Herman Melville, 
1819-1891 


To deflect envy, Gracian recommends that the powerful display a 
weakness, a minor social indiscretion, a harmless vice. Give those who 
envy you something to feed on, distracting them from your more impor¬ 
tant sins. Remember: It is the reality that matters. You may have to play 
games with appearances, but in the end you will have what counts: true 
power. In some Arab countries, a man will avoid arousing envy by doing 
as Cosimo de Medici did by showing his wealth only on the inside of his 
house. Apply this wisdom to your own character. 

Beware of some of envy’s disguises. Excessive praise is an almost sure 
sign that the person praising you envies you; they are either setting you up 
for a fall—it will be impossible for you to live up to their praise—or they 
are sharpening their blades behind your back. At the same time, those who 
are hypercritical of you, or who slander you publicly, probably envy you 
as well. Recognize their behavior as disguised envy and you keep out of 
the trap of mutual mud-slinging, or of taking their criticisms to heart. Win 
your revenge by ignoring their measly presence. 

Do not try to help or do favors for those who envy you; they will think 
you are condescending to them. Joe Orton’s attempt to help Hafliwell find 
a gallery for his work only intensified his lover’s feelings of inferiority and 
envy. Once envy reveals itself for what it is, the only solution is often to 
flee the presence of the enviers, leaving them to stew in a hell of their own 
creation. 

Finally, be aware that some environments are more conducive to envy 
than others. The effects of envy are more serious among colleagues and 
peers, where there is a veneer of equality. Envy is also destructive in demo¬ 
cratic environments where overt displays of power are looked down upon. 
Be extrasensitive in such environments. The filmmaker Ingmar Bergman 
was hounded by Swedish tax authorities because he stood out in a country 
where standing out from the crowd is frowned on. It is almost impossible 
to avoid envy in such cases, and there is little you can do but accept it gra¬ 
ciously and take none of it personally. As Thoreau once said, “Envy is the 
tax which all distinction must pay.” 


Image: A Garden of Weeds. You may not 
feed them but they spread as you water 
the garden. You may not see how, but 
they take over, tall and ugly, pre¬ 
venting anything beautiful from 
flourishing. Before it is too late, 
do not water indiscrimi¬ 
nately. Destroy the weeds 
of envy by giving them 


408 LAW 46 


nothing to feed on. 



Authority: Upon occasion, reveal a harmless defect in your charac¬ 
ter. For the envious accuse the most perfect of sinning by having no 
sins. They become an Argus, all eyes for finding fault with excel¬ 
lence—it is their only consolation. Do not let envy burst with its own 
venom—affect some lapse in valor or intellect, so as to disarm it 
beforehand. You thus wave your red cape before the Horns of Envy, 
in order to save your immortality. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658) 


REVERSAL 

The reason for being careful with the envious is that they are so indirect, 
and will find innumerable ways to undermine you. But treading carefully 
around them will often only make their envy worse. They sense that you 
are being cautious, and it registers as yet another sign of your superiority. 
That is why you must act before envy takes root. 

Once envy is there, however, whether through your fault or not, it is 
sometimes best to affect the opposite approach: Display the utmost disdain 
for those who envy you. Instead of hiding your perfection, make it obvi¬ 
ous. Make every new triumph an opportunity to make die envious squirm. 
Your good fortune and power become their living hell. If you attain a posi¬ 
tion of unimpeachable power, their envy will have no effect on you, and 
you will have the best revenge of all: They are trapped in envy while you 
are free in your power. 

This is how Michelangelo triumphed over the venomous architect 
Bramante, who turned Pope Julius against Michelangelo’s design for his 
tomb. Bramante envied Michelangelo’s godlike skills, and to this one tri¬ 
umph—the aborted tomb project—he thought to add another, by pushing 
the pope to commission Michelangelo to paint the murals in the Sistine 
Chapel. The project would take years, during which Michelangelo would 
accomplish no more of his brilliant sculptures. Furthermore, Bramante 
considered Michelangelo not nearly as skilled in painting as in sculpture. 
The chapel would spoil his image as the perfect artist. 

Michelangelo saw the trap and wanted to turn down the commission, 
but he could not refuse the pope, so he accepted it without complaint. 
Then, however, he used Bramante’s envy to spur him to greater heights, 
making the Sistine Chapel his most perfect work of all. Every time Bra¬ 
mante heard of it or saw it, he felt more oppressed by his own envy—the 
sweetest and most lasting revenge you can exact on the envious. 


Know how to triumph 
over envy and malice. 
Here contempt , 
although prudent, 
counts, indeed, for 
little; magnanimity is 
better. A good word 
concerning one. who 
speaks evil of you 
cannot be praised too 
highly: there is no 
revenge more heroic 
than that brought 
about by those merits 
and attainments which 
frustrate and torment 
the envious. Every 
stroke of good fortune 
is a further twist of the 
rope round the neck of 
the ill-disposed and the 
heaven of the envied is 
hell for the envious. To 
convert your good 
fortune into poison for 
your enemies is held to 
be the most severe 
punishment you can 
inflict on them. The 
envious man dies not 
only once but as many 
times as the person he 
envies lives to hear the 
voice of praise; the 
eternity of the latter's 
fame is the measure of 
the former’s punish¬ 
ment: the one is immor¬ 
tal in his glory, the 
latter in his misery. The 
trumpet of fame which 
sounds immortality for 
the one heralds death 
for the other, who is 
sentenced to be choked 
to death on his own 
envy. 

Baltasar Gracian, 
1601-1658 


LAW 46 409 



LAW 



DO NOT GO PAST THE 
MARK YOU AIMED FOR; 

IN VICTORY, 

LEARN WHEN TO STOP 


JUDGMENT 

The moment of victory is often the moment of greatest 
peril. In the heat of victory, arrogance and overconfi¬ 
dence can push you past the goal you had aimed for, and 
by going too far, you make more enemies than you defeat 
Do not allow success to go to your head. There is no sub¬ 
stitute for strategy and careful planning. Set a goal, and 
when you reach it, stop . 



TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

In 559 B.C., a young man named Cyrus gathered an immense army from 
the scattered tribes of Persia and marched against his grandfather Astyages, 
king of the Medes. He defeated Astyages with ease, had himself crowned 
king of Medea and Persia, and began to forge the Persian Empire. Victory 
followed victory in quick succession. Cyrus defeated Croesus, ruler of 
Lydia, then conquered the Ionian islands and other smaller kingdoms; he 
marched on Babylon and crushed it Now he was known as Cyrus the 
Great, King of the World. 

After capturing the riches of Babylon, Cyrus set his sights on the east, 
on the half-barbaric tribes of the Massagetai, a vast realm on the Caspian 
Sea. A fierce warrior race led by Queen Tomyris, the Massagetai lacked the 
riches of Babylon, but Cyrus decided to attack them anyway, believing 
himself superhuman and incapable of defeat. The Massagetai would fall 
easily to his vast armies, making his empire immense. 

In 529 B.C., then, Cyrus marched to the wide river Araxes, gateway to 
the kingdom of the Massagetai. As he set up camp on the western bank, he 
received a message from Queen Tomyris: “King of the Medes,” she told 
him, “I advise you to abandon this enterprise, for you cannot know if in the 
end it will do you any good. Rule your own people, and try to bear the 
sight of me ruling mine. But of course you will refuse my advice, as the last 
thing you wish for is to live in peace.” Tomyris, confident of her army’s 
strength and not wishing to delay the inevitable battle, offered to withdraw 
the troops on her side of the river, allowing Cyrus to cross its waters safely 
and fight her army on the eastern side, if that was his desire. 

Cyrus agreed, but instead of engaging the enemy directly he decided 
to play a trick. The Massagetai knew few luxuries. Once Cyrus had crossed 
the river and made his camp on the eastern side, he set the table for an 
elaborate banquet, full of meat, delicacies, and strong wine. Then he left 
his weakest troops in the camp and withdrew the rest of the army to the 
river. A large Massagetai detachment soon attacked the camp and killed all 
of the Persian soldiers in a fierce battle. Then, overwhelmed by the fabu¬ 
lous feast that had been left behind, they ate and drank to their hearts’ con¬ 
tent Later, inevitably, they fell asleep. The Persian army returned to the 
camp that night, killing many of the sleeping soldiers and capturing the 
rest. Among the prisoners was their general, a youth named Spargapises, 
son of Queen Tomyris. 

When the queen learned what had happened, she sent a message to 
Cyrus, chiding him for using tricks to defeat her army. “Now listen to me,” 
she wrote, “and I will advise you for your own good: Give me back my son 
and leave my country with your forces intact, and be content with your tri¬ 
umph over a third part of the Massagetai. If you refuse, I swear by the sun 
our master to give you more blood than you can drink, for all your glut¬ 
tony.” Cyrus scoffed at her: He would not release her son. He would crush 
these barbarians. 

The queen’s son, seeing he would not be released, could not stand the 


THE V.MNCl.omoi S 
COCKEREL 

Two cockerels fought 
on a dungheap. One 
cockerel was the 
stronger: he 
vanquished the other 
and drove him from 
the dungheap. 

All the hens gathered 
around the cockerel, 
and began to laud him. 
The cockerel wanted 
his strength and glory 
to be known in the next 
yard. He flew on top of 
the barn, flapped his 
wings, and crowed in a 
loud voice: “Look at 
me, all of you. / am a 
victorious cockerel. 

No other cockerel in 
the world has such 
strength as /." 

The cockerel had not 
finished , when an eagle 
killed him, seized him 
in his claws, and 
carried him to his nest. 
FABLES, 

Leo Tolstoy, 
1828-1910 


LAW 47 


411 



Ti ik sk<,)i knck 01 
(|{()ss-i:\.vmi\ vnoN 

In all your cross- 
examinations ..., most 
important of all, let me 
repeat the injunction to 
he ever on the alert for 
a good place to stop. 
Nothing can be more 
important than to close 
your examination with 
a triumph. So many 
lawyers succeed in 
catching a witness in a 
serious contradiction; 
but, not satisfied with 
this, go on asking ques¬ 
tions, and taper off 
their examination until 
the effect upon the jury 
of their former advan¬ 
tage is tost altogether. 

THE ART Oh CROSS- 
EXAMINATION, 

Francis L. Wellman. 

1913 


THK oykhrkaciiim: 

GKNKRAI 

We read of many 
instances of this kind; 
(or the general who by 
his valor has 
conquered a state for 
his master, and won 
great glory for himself 
by his victory over the 
enemy, and has loaded 
his soldiers with rich 
booty, acquires neces¬ 
sarily with his own 
soldiers, as well as with 
those of the enemy and 
with the subjects of the 
prince, so high a repu¬ 
tation, that his very 
victory may become 
distasteful, and a cause, 
for apprehension to his 
prince. For as the 


humiliation, and so he killed himself. The news of her son’s death over¬ 
whelmed Tomyris. She gathered all the forces that she could muster in her 
kingdom, and whipping them into a vengeful frenzy, engaged Cyrus’s 
troops in a violent and bloody battle. Finally, the Massagetai prevailed. In 
their anger they decimated the Persian army, killing Cyrus himself. 

After the battle, Tomyris and her soldiers searched the battiefield for 
Cyrus’s corpse. When she found it she cut off his head and shoved it into a 
wineskin full of human blood, crying out, “Though I have conquered you 
and live, yet you have ruined me by treacherously taking my son. See 
now—I fulfill my threat: You have your fill of blood.” After Cyrus’s death, 
the Persian Empire quickly unraveled. One act of arrogance undid all of 
Cyrus’s good work. 

Interpretation 

There is nothing more intoxicating than victory, and nothing more dan¬ 
gerous. 

Cyrus had built his great empire on the ruins of a previous one. A hun¬ 
dred years earlier, the powerful Assyrian Empire had been totally de¬ 
stroyed, its once splendid capital of Nineveh but ruins in the sand. The 
Assyrians had suffered this fate because they had pushed too far, destroy¬ 
ing one city-state after another until they lost sight of the purposes of their 
victories, and also of the costs. They overextended themselves and made 
many enemies who were finally able to band together and destroy them. 

Cyrus ignored the lesson of Assyria. He paid no heed to the warnings 
of oracles and advisers. He did not worry about offending a queen. His 
many victories had gone to his head, clouding his reason. Instead of con¬ 
solidating his already vast empire, he pushed forward. Instead of recogniz¬ 
ing each situation as different, he thought each new war would bring the 
same result as the one before as long as he used the methods he knew: 
ruthless force and cunning. 

Understand: In the realm of power, you must be guided by reason. To 
let a momentary thrill or an emotional victory influence or guide your 
moves will prove fatal. When you attain success, step back. Be cautious. 
When you gain victory, understand the part played by the particular cir¬ 
cumstances of a situation, and never simply repeat the same actions again 
and again. History is littered with the ruins of victorious empires and the 
corpses of leaders who could not learn to stop and consolidate their gains. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

No single person in history has occupied a more delicate and precarious 
position than the king’s mistress. She had no real or legitimate power base 
to fall back on in times of trouble; she was surrounded by packs of envious 
courtiers eagerly anticipating her fall from grace; and finally, since the 
source of her power was usually her physical beauty, for most royal mis¬ 
tresses that fall was inevitable and unpleasant. 


412 LAW i7 




King Louis XV of France began to keep official mistresses in the early 
days of his reign, each woman’s good fortune rarely lasting more than a 
few yean;. But then came Madame de Pompadour, who, when she was a 
middle-class child of nine named Jeanne Poisson, had been told by a for¬ 
tune-teller that she would someday be the king’s favorite. This seemed an 
absurd dream, since the royal mistress almost always came from the aris¬ 
tocracy. Jeanne nevertheless believed herself destined to seduce the king, 
and doing so became her obsession. She applied herself to the talents the 
king’s favorite had to have—music, dancing, acting, horseback riding— 
and she excelled in every one of them. As a young woman, she married a 
man of the lower nobility, which gave her an entree to the best salons in 
Paris. Word quickly spread of her beauty, talent, charm, and intelligence. 

Jeanne Poisson became dose friends with Voltaire, Montesquieu, and 
other great minds of the time, but she never lost sight of the goal she had 
set herself as a girl: to capture the heart of the king. Her husband had a 
chateau in a forest w here the king would often go hunting, and she began 
to spend a lot of time there. Studying his movements like a hawk, she 
would make sure he would “happen” to come upon her while she was out 
walking in her most alluring dress, or riding in her splendid coach. The 
king began to take note of her, making her gifts of the game he caught in 
the hunt. 

In 1744 Louis’s current mistress, the Duchesse de Chateauroux, died. 
Jeanne went on the offensive. She placed herself everywhere he would be: 
at masked balls at Versailles, at the opera, wherever their paths would 
cross, and wherever she could display her many talents: dancing, singing, 
riding, coquetry. The king finally succumbed to her charms, and in a cere¬ 
mony at Versailles in September of 1745, this twenty-four-year-old daugh¬ 
ter of a middle-class banking agent was officially inaugurated as the king’s 
mistress. She was given her own room in the palace, a room the king could 
enter at any time via a hidden stairway and back door. And because some 
of the courtiers were angry that he had chosen a woman of low origins, he 
made her a marquise. From now on she would be known as Madame de 
Pompadour. 

The king was a man whom the slightest feeling of boredom would op¬ 
press out of proportion. Madame de Pompadour knew that keeping him 
under her spell meant keeping him amused. To that end she put on con¬ 
stant theatrical productions at Versailles, in which she starred. She orga¬ 
nized elaborate hunting parties, masked balls, and whatever else it would 
take to keep him diverted outside the bedroom. She became a patroness of 
the arts, and the arbiter of taste and fashion for all of France. Her enemies 
at the court only grew in number with each new success, but Madame de 
Pompadour thwarted them in a totally novel way for a king’s mistress: with 
extreme politeness. Snobs who resented her for her low birth she won over 
with charm and grace. Most unusual of all, she befriended the queen, and 
insisted that Louis XV pay more attention to his wife, and treat her more 
kindly. Even the royal family begrudgingly gave her their support, lo 


nature of men is ambi¬ 
tious as welt as suspi¬ 
cious, and puts no 
limits to one 'v good 
fortune, it is run impos¬ 
sible that the suspicion 
that may suddenly be 
aroused in the mind of 
the prince by the 
victory of the general 
may have been aggra¬ 
vated by some haughty 
expressions or insolent 
acts an his part; so that 
the prince will natu¬ 
rally be made to think 
of securing h imself 
against the ambition of 
his general. 

And to do this, (he 
means (hat suggest 
themselves to him are 
either to have the 
general killed, or to 
deprive him of that 
reputation which he 
has acquired with the 
prince s army and the 
people., by using every 
means to prove that the 
general's victory wrt.s 
not due to his skill and 
courage , but to chance 
and the cowardice of 
the. enemy, or to the 
sagacity of the other 
captains who were with 
him in that action. 

N kcolO M achiavelu , 
1469-1527 


m 


LAW 47 



A man who was 
famous as a tree 
climber v^«.v guiding 
someone in climbing a 
tall tree. He ordered the 
man to cut the top 
branches, and, during 
this time, when the man 
seemed to be in great 
danger, the expert said 
nothing. Only when the 
man kw coming down 
and had reached (he 
height of the eaves did 
the expert call out, "He 
careful! Watch your 
step coming down!'’ / 
asked him, “ Why did 
you say that? At that 
height he could tump 
the rest of the way if he 
chose." 

"That s (he point ," said 
the expert. "As long as 
the man was up at a 
dizzy height and the 
branches were threat¬ 
ening to break, he 
himself was so afraid 1 
said nothing. Mistakes 
are always made when 
people get to the easy 
places ." 
This man belonged to 
the lowest class, but his 
words were in perfect 
accord with the 
precepts of the sages. In 
football too, they say 
that after you have 
kicked out of a difficult 
place and you think the 
next one will be easier 
you are sure to miss the 
ball. 

ESSAYS JN IDLENESS, 

Kgnko. 

Japan, 

FOURTEENTH CENTURY 


crown her glory, the king made her a duchess. Her sway was felt even in 
politics: Indeed she became the untitled minister of foreign affairs. 

In 1751, when Madame de Pompadour was at the heigh t of her power, 
she experienced her worst crisis. Physically weakened by the responsibili 
ties of her position, she found it increasingly difficult to meet the king’s de¬ 
mands in bed. This was usually the point at which the mistress would meet 
her end, struggling to maintain her position as her beauty faded. But 
Madame de Pompadour had a strategy: She encouraged the king to set up 
a kind of brothel, Parc aux Cerfs, on the grounds of Versailles. There the 
middle-aged king could have liaisons with the most beautiful young girls in 
the realm. 

Madame de Pompadour knew that her charm and her political acu¬ 
men had made her indispensable to the king. What did she have to fear 
from a sixteen-year-old who had none of her power and presence? What 
did it matter if she lost her position in the bedroom, as long as she re¬ 
mained the most powerful woman in France? To secure that position she 
became still closer friends with the queen, with whom she started attending 
church. Although her enemies at the court conspired to have her toppled 
from her official position as king’s mistress, the king kept her on, for he 
needed her calming effect. It was only when her part in the disastrous 
Seven Years’ War drew much criticism on her that she slowly withdrew 
from public affairs. 

Madame de Pompadour’s health had always been delicate, and she 
died at the age of forty-three, in 1764. Her reign as mistress had lasted an 
unprecedented twenty years. “She was regretted by all,” wrote the Due de 
Croy, “for she was kindly and helpful to everyone who approached her.” 

Interpretation 

Aware of the temporariness of her power, the king’s mistress would often 
go into a kind of frenzy after capturing the king: She would try to accumu¬ 
late as much money as possible to protect her after her inevitable fall. And 
to extend her reign as long as possible, she would be ruthless with her ene¬ 
mies in the court. Her situation, in other words, seemed to demand from 
her a greed and vindictiveness that would often be her undoing. Madame 
de Pompadour succeeded where all others had failed because she never 
pressed her good fortune. Instead of bullying the courtiers from her power¬ 
ful position as the king’s mistress, she tried to win their support. She never 
revealed the slightest hint of greed or arrogance. When she could no 
longer perform her physical duties as mistress, she did not fret at the 
thought of someone replacing her in bed. She simply applied some strat¬ 
egy— she encouraged the king to take young lovers, knowing that the 
younger and prettier they were, the less of a threat they posed, since they 
could not compare to her in charm and sophistication and would soon 
bore the monarch. 

Success plays strange tricks on the mind. It makes you feel invulnera¬ 
ble, while also making you more hostile and emotional when people chal- 


414 LAW 47 



lenge your power. It makes you less able to adapt to circumstance. You 
come to believe your character is more responsible for your success than 
your strategizing and planning. Like Madame de Pompadour, you need to 
realize that your moment of triumph is also a moment when you have to 
rely on cunning and strategy all the more, consolidating your power base, 
recognizing the role of luck and circumstance in your success, and remain¬ 
ing vigilant against changes in your good fortune. It is the moment of vic¬ 
tory when you need to play the courtier’s game and pay more attention 
than ever to the laws of power. 

The greatest danger occurs at the moment of victory. 

Napoleon Bonaparte , 1769-1821 


KEYS TO POWER 

Power has its own rhythms and patterns. Those who succeed at the game 
are the ones who control the patterns and vary them at will, keeping peo¬ 
ple off balance while they set the tempo. The essence of strategy is control¬ 
ling what comes next, and the elation of victory can upset your ability to 
control what comes next in two ways. First, you owe your success to a pat¬ 
tern that you are apt to try to repeat. You will try to keep moving in the 
same direction without stopping to see whether this is still the direction that 
is best for you. Second, success tends to go to your head and make you 
emotional. Feeling invulnerable, you make aggressive moves that ulti¬ 
mately undo the victory you have gained. 

The lesson is simple: The powerful vary their rhythms and patterns, 
change course, adapt to circumstance, and learn to improvise. Rather than 
letting their dancing feet impel them forward, they step back and look 
where they are going. It is as if their bloodstream bore a kind of antidote to 
the intoxication of victory, letting them control their emotions and come to 
a kind of mental halt when they have attained success. They steady them¬ 
selves, give themselves the space to reflect on what has happened, examine 
the role of circumstance and luck in their success. As they say in riding 
school, you have to be able to control yourself before you can control the 
horse. 

Luck and circumstance always play a role in power. This is inevitable, 
and actually makes the game more interesting. But despite what you may 
think, good luck is more dangerous than bad luck. Bad luck teaches valu¬ 
able lessons about patience, timing, and the need to be prepared for the 
worst; good luck deludes you into the opposite lesson, making you think 
your brillliance will carry you through. Your fortune will inevitably turn, 
and when it does you will be completely unprepared. 

According to Machiavelli, this is what undid Cesare Borgia. He had 
many triumphs, was actually a clever strategist, but had the bad luck to 
have good luck: He had a pope for a father. Then, when he had bad luck 
for real—his father’s death—he was unprepared for it, and the many ene- 


LAW 47 415 



irues he had made devoured him, The good luck that elevates you or seals 
your success brings the moment for you to open your eyes: The wheel of 
fortune will hurtle you down as easily as up. If you prepare for the fall, it is 
less likely to ruin you when it happens. 

People who have a run of success can catch a kind of fever, and even 
when they themselves try to stay calm, the people below them often pres¬ 
sure them to go past their mark and into dangerous waters. You have to 
have a strategy for dealing with these people. Simply preaching modera¬ 
tion will make you look weak and small-minded; seeming to fail to follow 
up on a victory can lessen your power. 

When the Athenian general and statesman Pericles led a series of 
naval campaigns around the Black Sea in 436 B.C., his easy triumphs en- 
flamed the Athenians’ desire for more. They dreamed of conquering 
Egypt, overrunning Persia, sailing for Sicily. On the one hand Pericles 
reined in these dangerous emotions by warning of the perils of hubris. On 
the other hand he fed them by fighting small battles that he knew he could 
win, creating the appearance that he was preserving the momentum of suc¬ 
cess. The skill with which Pericles played this game is revealed by what 
happened when he died: The demagogues took over, pushed Athens into 
invading Sicily, and in one rash move destroyed an empire. 

The rhythm of power often requires an alternation of force and cun¬ 
ning. Too much force creates a counterreaction; too much cunning, no 
matter how cunning it is, becomes predictable. Working on behalf of his 
master, the shogun Oda Nobunaga, the great sixteenth-century Japanese 
general (and future emperor) Hideyoshi once engineered a stunning vic¬ 
tory over the army of the formidable General Yoshimoto. The shogun 
wanted to go further, to take on and crush yet another powerful enemy, but 
Hideyoshi reminded him of the old Japanese saying: “When you have 
won a victory, tighten the strings of your helmet.” For Hideyoshi this was 
the moment for the shogun to switch from force to cunning and indirec¬ 
tion, setting his enemies against one another through a series of deceptive 
alliances. In this way he would avoid stirring up needless opposition by 
appearing overly aggressive. When you are victorious, then, lie low, and 
lull the enemy into inaction. These changes of rhythm are immensely 
powerful. 

People who go past the mark are often motivated by a desire to please 
a master by proving their dedication. But an excess of effort exposes you to 
the risk of making the master suspicious of you. On several occasions, gen¬ 
erals under Philip of Macedon were disgraced and demoted immediately 
after leading their troops to a great victory; one more such victory, Philip 
thought, and the man might become a rival instead of an underling. When 
you serve a master, it is often wise to measure your victories carefully, let¬ 
ting him get the glory and never making him uneasy. It is also wise to es¬ 
tablish a pattern of strict obedience to earn his trust. In the fourth century 
B.C., a captain under the notoriously severe Chinese general Wu Ch’i 
charged ahead before a battle had begun and came back with several 



enemy heads. He thought he had shown his fiery enthusiasm, but Wu Ch'i 
was unimpressed. “A talented officer,” the general said with a sigh as he or¬ 
dered the man beheaded, “but a disobedient one.” 

Another moment when a small success can spoil the chances for a 
larger one may come if a master or superior grants you a favor: It is a dan¬ 
gerous mistake to ask for more. You will seem insecure—perhaps you feel 
you did not deserve this favor, and have to grab as much as you can when 
you have the chance, which may not come again. The proper response is 
to accept the favor graciously and withdraw. Any subsequent favors you 
should earn without having to ask for them. 

Finally, the moment when you stop has great dramatic import. What 
comes last sticks in the mind as a kind of exclamation point There is no 
better time to stop and walk away than after a victory. Keep going and you 
risk lessening the effect, even ending up defeated. As lawyers say of cross- 
examination, “Always stop with a victory.” 


Image; Icarus Falling 
from the Sky. His father 
Daedalus fashions wings 
of wax that allow the 
two men to fly out of 
the labyrinth and 
escape the Minotaur. 
Elated by the tri¬ 
umphant escape 
and the feeling of 
flight, Icarus soars 
higher and high¬ 
er, until the sun 
melts the wings 
and he hurtles 
to his death. 


Authority: Princes and republics should content themselves with victory, 
for when they aim at more, they generally lose. The use of insulting lan¬ 
guage toward an enemy arises from the insolence of victory, or from the 
false hope of victory, which latter misleads men as often in their actions 
as in their words; for w’hen this false hope takes possession of the mind, 
it makes men go beyond the mark, and causes them to sacrifice a cer¬ 
tain good for an uncertain better. (Niccolo Machiaveili, 1469-1527} 



REVERSAL 

As Machiavelli says, either destroy a man or leave him alone entirely. In¬ 
flicting half punishment or mild injury will only create an enemy whose 
bitterness will grow with time, and who will take revenge. When you beat 
an enemy, then, make your victory complete. Crush him into nonexis¬ 
tence. In the moment of victory, you do not restrain yourself from crushing 
the enemy you have defeated, but rather from needlessly advancing 
against others. Be merciless with your enemy, but do not create new ene¬ 
mies by overreaching. 

There are some who become more cautious than ever after a victory, 
which they see as just giving them more possessions to worry about and 
protect. Your caution after victory should never make you hesitate, or lose 
momentum, but rather act as a safeguard against rash action. On the other 
hand, momentum as a phenomenon is greatly overrated. You create your 
own successes, and if they follow one upon the other, it is your own doing. 
Belief in momentum will only make you emotional, less prone to act strate¬ 
gically, and more apt to repeat the same methods. Leave momentum for 
those who have nothing better to rely upon. 



LAW 


48 

ASSUME FORMLESSNESS 


JUDGMENT 

By taking a shape, by having a visible plan, you open 
yourself to attack. Instead of taking a formi for your 
enemy to grasp > keep yourself adaptable and on the move. 
Accept the fact that nothing is certain and no law is 
fixed. The best way to protect yourself is to be as fluid 
and formless as water; never bet on stability or lasting 
order. Everything changes. 



hi martial arts, it is 
important that strategy 
he unfathomable, that 
form be concealed, and 
that movements he 
unexpected, so that 
preparedness against 
them he impossible. 
What enables a good 
general to win without 
fail is always having 
unfat h o mu hie wisdon i 
and a modus operandi 
that leaves no tracks. 

Only the formless 
cannot he affected. 
Sages hide in unfath- 
nmahUUy. so their feel¬ 
ings cannot he 
observed; they operate, 
in formlessness . so their 
lines cannot he crossed. 

THI-: ROOK t)f ; TIM-. 
HU AIN AN MASTERS, 

China, 

SECOND CENTURY ICC. 


Tin: not, with i nr; 

CHOm.l) K\HS 

'‘What crime have l 
committed that / 
should be thus muti¬ 
lated by my own 
master? ” pensi vely 
exclaimed Jowler. a 
young mastiff. “Here's 
a pretty condition for a 
dog of my pretentionsl 
How can / show my 
face among my 
friends? Oh! king of 
beasts, or rather their 
tyrant, who would dare 
to treat you thus?" His 
complaints were not 
unfounded, for that 
very morning, his 
master, despite the 
piercing shrieks of our 
young friend, had 


TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW 

By the eighth century B.C., the city-states of Greece had grown so large and 
prosperous that they had run out of land to support their expanding popu¬ 
lations. So they turned to the sea, establishing colonies in Asia Minor, 
Sicily, the Italian peninsula, even Africa. The city-state of Sparta, however, 
was landlocked and surrounded by mountains. Lacking access to the 
Mediterranean, the Spartans never became a seafaring people; instead 
they turned on the cities around them, and, in a series of brutal, violent 
conflicts lasting more than a hundred years, managed to conquer an im¬ 
mense area that would provide enough land for their citizens. This solution 
to their problem, however, brought a new, more formidable one: How 
could they maintain and police their conquered territories? The subordi¬ 
nate peoples they ruled now outnumbered them ten to one. Surely this 
horde would take a horrible revenge on them. 

Sparta’s solution was to create a society dedicated to the art of war. 
Spartans would be tougher, stronger, and fiercer than their neighbors. This 
was the only way they could ensure their stability and survival. 

When a Spartan boy reached the age of seven, he was taken from his 
mother and placed in a military club where he was trained to fight and un¬ 
derwent the strictest discipline. The boys slept on beds of reeds; they were 
allotted only one outer garment to wear for an entire year. They studied 
none of the arts; indeed, the Spartans banned music, and permitted only 
slaves to practice the crafts that were necessary to sustain them. The only 
skills the Spartans taught were those of warfare. Children seen as weaklings 
were left to die in a cavern in the mountains. No system of money or trad¬ 
ing was allowed in Sparta; acquired wealth, they believed, would sow self¬ 
ishness and dissension, weakening their warrior discipline. The only way a 
Spartan could earn a living was through agriculture, mostly on state-owned 
lands, which slaves, called helots, would work for him. 

The Spartans’ single-mindedness allowed them to forge the most pow¬ 
erful infantry in the world. They marched in perfect order and fought with 
incomparable bravery. Their tight-knit phalanxes could vanquish an army 
ten times their size, as they proved in defeating the Persians at Thermopy¬ 
lae. A Spartan column on the march would strike terror in the enemy; it 
seemed to have no weaknesses. Yet although the Spartans proved them¬ 
selves mighty warriors, they had no interest in creating an empire. They 
only wanted to keep what they had already conquered and to defend it 
against invaders. Decades would pass without a single change in the system 
that had succeeded so well in preserving Sparta’s status quo. 

At the same time that the Spartans were evolving their warlike culture, 
another city-state was rising to equal prominence: Athens. Unlike Sparta, 
Athens had taken to the sea, not so much to create colonies as for purposes 
of trade. The Athenians became great merchants; their currency, the fa¬ 
mous “owl coins,” spread throughout the Mediterranean. Unlike the rigid 
Spartans, the Athenians responded to every problem with consummate 
creativity, adapting to the occasion and creating new social forms and new 


420 LAW 48 



arts at an incredible pace. Their society was in constant flux. And as their 
power grew, they came to pose a threat to the defense-minded Spartans. 

In 431 B.C., the war that had been brewing betw een Athens and Sparta 
for so long finally erupted. It lasted twenty-seven years, but after many 
twists of fortune, the Spartan war machine finally emerged victorious. The 
Spartans now commanded an empire, and this tune they could not stay in 
their shell. If they gave up what they had gained, the beaten Athenians 
would regroup and rise against them, and the long war would have been 
fought for naught. 

After the war, Athenian money poured into Sparta, The Spartans had 
been trained in warfare, not politics or economics; because they were so 
unaccustomed to it, wealth and its accompanying ways of life seduced and 
overwhelmed them. Spartan governors were sent to rule what had been 
Athenian lands; far from home, they succumbed to the worst forms of cor¬ 
ruption. Sparta had defeated Athens, but the fluid Athenian way of life was 
slowly breaking down its discipline and loosening its rigid order. And 
Athens, meanwhile, was adapting to losing its empire, managing to thrive 
as a cultural and economic center. 

Confused by a change in its status quo, Sparta grew weaker and 
weaker. Some thirty years after defeating Athens, it lost an important batde 
with the city-state of Thebes. Almost overnight, this once mighty nation 
collapsed, never to recover. 

Interpretation 

In the evolution of species, protective armor has almost always spelled dis¬ 
aster. Although there are a few exceptions, the shell most often becomes a 
dead end for the animal encased in it; it slows the creature down, making it 
hard for it to forage for food and making it a target for fast-moving preda¬ 
tors. Animals that take to the sea or sky, and that move swiftly and unpre- 
dictably, are infinitely more powerful and secure. 

In facing a serious problem—controlling superior numbers—Sparta 
reacted like an animal that develops a shell to protect itself from the envi¬ 
ronment. But like a turtle, the Spartans sacrificed mobility for safety. They 
managed to preserve stability for three hundred years, but at what cost? 
They had no culture beyond warfare, no arts to relieve the tension, a con¬ 
stant anxiety about the status quo. While their neighbors took to the sea, 
learning to adapt to a world of constant motion, the Spartans entombed 
themselves in their own system. Victory would mean new lands to govern, 
which they did not want; defeat would mean the end of their military ma¬ 
chine, which they did not want, either. Only stasis allowed them to survive. 
But nothing in the world can remain stable forever, and the shell or system 
you evolve for your protection will someday prove your undoing. 

In the case of Sparta, it was not the armies of Athens that defeated it, 
but the Athenian money. Money flows everywhere it has the opportunity" 
to go; it cannot be controlled, or made to fit a prescribed pattern. It is in¬ 
herently chaotic. And in the long run, money made Athens the conqueror, 


barbarously cut o ff his 
long pendent ears, 
fowler expected noth¬ 
ing less than to give up 
the ghost. 

As he advanced in 
years, he perceived that 
he gained more than he 
had lost by his mutila¬ 
tion; for, being natu¬ 
rally inclined to fight 
with others, he would 
often have returned 
home with this pan 
disfigured in a hundred 
places. A quarrelsome 
dog always has his ears 
lacerated. 

The (ess we leave 
others to lay hold of 
the better. When one 
has but one point to 
defend, it should be 
protected for fear of 
accident. Take for 
example Master Jowler, 
who. being armed with 
a spiked collar, and 
having about as much 
ear as a bird. a wolf 
would he puzzled to 
know where to 
tackle him. 

FABLES, 

Jean »e La Fontaine. 
.1621 1695 


LAW 48 


421 




One seductive and ulti¬ 
mately always fatal 
path has been the 
development of protec¬ 
tive armor. An organ¬ 
ism can protect itself by 
concealment, by swift¬ 
ness in flight, by effec¬ 
tive counterattack, by 
uniting for attack and 
defense with other indi¬ 
viduals of its species 
and also by encasing 
itself within bony plates 
and spines .... Almost 
always the experiment 
of armor failed. Crea¬ 
tures adopting it tended 
to become unwieldy. 
They had to move rela¬ 
tively slowly. Hence 
they were forced to live 
mainly on vegetable 
food; and thus in 
general they were at a 
disadvantage as 
compared with foes 
living on more rapidly 
“ profitable " animal 
food: The repeated fail¬ 
ure of protective armor 
shows that, even at a 
somewhat low evolu¬ 
tionary level, mind 
triumphed over mere 
matter. It is this sort of 
triumph which has 
been supremely exem¬ 
plified in Man. 

SCIENTIFIC THEORY 
AND RELIGION, 

E. W. Barnes, 
1933 


422 \ LAW 48 


by infiltrating the Spartan system and corroding its protective armor. In the 
battle between the two systems, Athens was fluid and creative enough to 
take new forms, while Sparta could grow only more rigid until it cracked. 

This is the way the world works, whether for animals, cultures, or indi¬ 
viduals. In the face of the world’s harshness and danger, organisms of any 
kind develop protection—a coat of armor, a rigid system, a comforting rit¬ 
ual. For the short term it may work, but for the long term it spells disaster. 
People weighed down by a system and inflexible ways of doing things can¬ 
not move fast, cannot sense or adapt to change. They lumber around more 
and more slowly until they go the way of the brontosaurus. Learn to move 
fast and adapt or you will be eaten. 

The best way to avoid this fate is to assume formlessness. No predator 
alive can attack what it cannot see. 


OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 

When World War II ended and the Japanese, who had invaded China 
in 1937, had finally been thrown out, the Chinese Nationalists, lead by 
Chiang Kai-shek, decided the time had come to annihilate the Chinese 
Communists, their hated rivals, once and for all. They had almost suc¬ 
ceeded in 1935, forcing the Communists into the Long March, the grueling 
retreat that had greatly diminished their numbers. Although the Commu¬ 
nists had recovered somewhat during the war against Japan, it would not 
be difficult to defeat them now. They controlled only isolated areas in the 
countryside, had unsophisticated weaponry', lacked any military experi¬ 
ence or training beyond mountain fighting, and controlled no important 
parts of China, except areas of Manchuria, which they had managed to take 
after the Japanese retreat. Chiang decided to commit his best forces in 
Manchuria. He would take over its major cities and from those bases would 
spread through this northern industrial region, sweeping the Communists 
away. Once Manchuria had fallen the Communists would collapse. 

In 1945 and ’46 the plan worked perfectly: The Nationalists easily 
took the major Manchurian cities. Puzzling! v, though, in the face of this 
critical campaign, the Communist strategy made no sense. When the Na¬ 
tionalists began their push, the Communists dispersed to Manchuria’s most 
out-of-the-way comers. Their small units harassed the Nationalist armies, 
ambushing them here, retreating unexpectedly there, but these dispersed 
units never linked up, making them hard to attack. They would seize a 
town only to give it up a few weeks later. Forming neither rear guards nor 
vanguards, they moved like mercury, never staying in one place, elusive 
and formless. 

The Nationalists ascribed this to two things: cowardice in the face 
of superior forces and inexperience in strategy, Mao Tse-tung, the Com¬ 
munist leader, was more a poet and philosopher than a general, whereas 
Chiang had studied warfare in the West and was a follower of the German 
military writer Carl von Clausewita, among others. 




Yet a pattern did eventually emerge in Mao’s attacks. After the Nation¬ 
alists had taken the cities, leaving the Communists to occupy what was gen¬ 
erally considered Manchuria’s useless space, the Communists started using 
that large space to surround the cities. If Chiang sent an army from one city 
to reinforce another, the Communists would encircle the rescuing army 
Chiang’s forces were slowly broken into smaller and smaller units, isolated 
from one another, their lines of supply and communication cut. The Na¬ 
tionalists still had superior firepower, but if they could not move, what 
good was it? 

A kind of terror overcame the Nationalist soldiers. Commanders com¬ 
fortably remote from the front lines might laugh at Mao, but the soldiers 
had fought the Communists in the mountains, and had come to fear their 
elusiveness. Now these soldiers sat in their cities and watched as their fast- 
moving enemies, as fluid as water, poured in on them from all sides. There 
seemed to be millions of them. The Communists also encircled the sol¬ 
diers’ spirits, bombarding them with propaganda to lower their morale and 
pressure them to desert. 

The Nationalists began to surrender in their minds. Their encircled 
and isolated cities started collapsing even before being directly attacked; 
one after another fell in quick succession. In November of 1948, the Na¬ 
tionalists surrendered Manchuria to the Communists—a humiliating blow 
to the technically superior Nationalist army, and one that proved decisive 
in the war. By the following year the Communists controlled all of China. 

Interpretation 

The two board games that best approximate the strategies of war are chess 
and the Asian game of go. In chess the board is small. In comparison to go, 
the attack comes relatively quickly, forcing a decisive battle. It rarely pays 
to withdraw, or to sacrifice your pieces, which must be concentrated at key 
areas. Go is much less formal. It is played on a large grid, with 361 inter¬ 
sections—nearly six times as many positions as in chess. Black and white 
stones (one color for each side) are placed on the board’s intersections, one 
at a time, wherever you like. Once all your stones (52 for each side) are on 
the board, the object is to isolate the stones of your opponent by encircling 
them. 

A game of go—called wei-chi in China—can last up to three hundred 
moves. The strategy is more subtle and fluid than chess, developing slowly; 
the more complex the pattern your stones initially create on the board, the 
harder it is for your opponent to understand your strategy. Fighting to con¬ 
trol a particular area is not worth the trouble: You have to think in larger 
terms, to be prepared to sacrifice an area in order eventually to dominate 
the board. What you are after is not an entrenched position but mobility. 
With mobility you can isolate the opponent in small areas and then encir¬ 
cle them. The aim is not to kill off the opponent’s pieces directly, as in 
chess, but to induce a kind of paralysis and collapse. Chess is linear, posi¬ 
tion oriented, and aggressive; go is nonlinear and fluid. Aggression is indi- 


TIIK HARK AND 
THK THKi : 

The sage neither seeks 
to follow the ways of 
the ancients nor estab¬ 
lishes any fixed stan¬ 
dard for all times hut 
examines the things of 
his age and then 
prepares to deal 
with them. 

There was in Sung a 
man , who tilled a field 
in which there stood 
the trunk of a tree. 

Once a hare, while 
running fast, rushed 
against the trunk , 
broke its neck, and 
died. Thereupon the 
man cast his plough 
aside and watched that 
tree, hoping that he 
would get another hare. 
Yet he never caught 
another hare and was 
himself ridiculed by the 
people of Sung. Now 
supposing somebody 
wanted to govern the 
people of the present 
age with the policies 
of the early kings, he 
would be doing exactly 
the same thing as that 
man who watched the 
tree. 

Han-fei-tzu, 

Chinese philosopher, 
THIRD CENTURY B.C. 


LAW 48 i 423 




General Rommel 
surpassed Patton as a 
creative intellect.... 
Rommel shunned mili¬ 
tary formalism. He 
made no fixed plans 
beyond those intended 
for the initial clash; 
thereafter ; he tailored 
his tactics to meet 
specific situations as 
they arose. He was a 
lightning-fast decision¬ 
maker , physically 
maintaining a pace that 
matched his active 
mentality. In a forbid¬ 
ding sea of sand, he 
Operated in a free envi¬ 
ronment. Once 
Rommel ruptured the 
British lines in Africa, 
he had the whole 
northern part of the 
continent opened 
to kim. 
Comparatively free 
from the hamstringing 
authority of Berlin, 
disregarding orders 
even from Hitler 
himself on occasion, 
Rommel implemented 
one successful opera¬ 
tion after mother until 
he had most of North 
Africa under his 
contr ol and Cairo 
trembling at his feet. 

THK AKT OF WINKING 
WARS, 

James Mrazek, 
1968 


rect until the end of the game, when the winner can surround the oppo¬ 
nent’s stones at an accelerated pace. 

Chinese military strategists have been influenced by go for centuries. 
Its proverbs have been applied to war time and again; Mao Tse-tung was 
an addict of wei-chi, and its precepts were ingrained in his strategies. A key 
wei-chi concept, for example, is to use the size of the board to your advan¬ 
tage, spreading out in every direction so that your opponent cannot fathom 
your movements in a simple linear- way. 

“Every Chinese,” Mao once wrote, “should consciously throw himself 
into this war of a jigsaw pattern” against the Nationalists. Place your men in 
a jigsaw pattern in go, and your opponent loses himself trying to figure out 
what you are up to. Either he wastes time pursuing you or, like Chiang Kai- 
shek, he assumes you are incompetent and fails to protect himself. And if 
he concentrates on single areas, as Western strategy advises, he becomes a 
sitting duck for encirclement. In the wei-chi way of war, you encircle the 
enemy’s brain, using mind games, propaganda, and irritation tactics to 
confuse and dishearten. This was die strategy of the Communists—an ap¬ 
parent formlessness that disoriented and terrified their enemy. 

Where chess is linear and direct, the ancient game of go is closer to the 
kind of strategy that will prove relevant in a world where batdes are fought 
indirectly, in vast, loosely connected areas. Its strategies are abstract and 
multidimensional, inhabiting a plane beyond time and space: the strate¬ 
gist’s mind. In this fluid form of warfare, you value movement over posi¬ 
tion. Your speed and mobility make it impossible to predict your moves; 
unable to understand you, your enemy can form no strategy to defeat you. 
Instead of fixing on particular spots, this indirect form of warfare spreads 
out, just as you can use the large and disconnected nature of the real world 
to your advantage. Be like a vapor. Do not give your opponents anything 
solid to attack; watch as they exhaust themselves pursuing you, trying to 
cope with your elusiveness. Only formlessness allows you to truly surprise 
your enemies—by the time they figure out where you are and what you are 
up to, it is too late. 

When you want to Jight us, we don’t let you and you can’t find us. But when 
we want to fight you , we make sure that you can f t get away and we hit you 
squarely . . . and wipe you out. . . . The enemy advances, we retreat; the enemy 
camps , we harass; the enemy tires, we attack; the enemy retreats, we pursue. 

Mao Tsetung, 1893-1976 


KEYS TO POWER 

The human animal is distinguished by its constant creation of forms. 
Rarely expressing its emotions directly, it gives them form through lan¬ 
guage, or through socially acceptable rituals. We cannot communicate our 
emotions without a form. 

The forms that we create, however, change constantly—in fashion, in 


424 : LAW 48 



style, in all those human phenomena representing the mood of the mo¬ 
ment. We are constantly altering the forms we have inherited from previ¬ 
ous generations, and these changes are signs of life and vitality. Indeed, the 
things that don’t change, the forms that rigidity, come to look to us like 
death, and we destroy them. The young show this most dearly: Uncom¬ 
fortable with the forms that society imposes upon them, having no set iden¬ 
tity, they play with their own characters, trying on a variety of masks and 
poses to express themselves. This is the vitality that drives the motor of 
form, creating constant changes in style. 

The powerful are often people who in their youth have shown im¬ 
mense creativity in expressing something new through a new form. Society 
grants them power because it hungers for and rewards this sort of newness. 
The problem comes later, when they often grow conservative and posses¬ 
sive. They no longer dream of creating new forms; their identities are set, 
their habits congeal, and their rigidity makes them easy targets. Everyone 
knows their next move. Instead of demanding respect they elicit boredom: 
Get off the stage 1 we say, let someone else, someone younger, entertain us. 
When locked in the past, the powerful look comical—they are overripe 
fruit, waiting to fall from the tree. 

Power can only thrive if it is flexible in its forms. To be formless is not 
to be amorphous; everything has a form—it is impossible to avoid. The 
formlessness of power is more like that of water, or mercury, taking the 
form of whatever is around it. Changing constantly, it is never predictable. 
The powerful are constantly creating form, and their power comes from 
the rapidity with which they can change. Their formlessness is in the eye of 
the enemy who cannot see what they are up to and so has nothing solid to 
attack. This is the premier pose of power: ungraspable, as elusive and swift 
as the god Mercury, who could take any form he pleased and used this 
ability to wreak havoc on Mount Olympus. 

Human creations evolve toward abstraction, toward being more men¬ 
tal and less material. This evolution is clear in art, which, in this century, 
made the great discovery of abstraction and conceptualism; it can also be 
seen in politics, which over time have become less overtly violent, more 
complicated, indirect and cerebral. Warfare and strategy too have followed 
this pattern. Strategy began in the manipulation of armies on land, posi¬ 
tioning them in ordered formations; on land, strategy is relatively two di¬ 
mensional, and controlled by topography. But all the great powers have 
eventually taken to the sea, for commerce and colonization. And to protect 
their trading lanes they have had to learn how to fight at sea. Mairtime war¬ 
fare requires tremendous creativity and abstract thinking, since the lines 
are constantly shifting. Naval captains distinguish themselves by their abil¬ 
ity to adapt to the literal fluidity of the terrain and to confuse the enemy 
with an abstract, hard-to-anticipate form. They are operating in a third di¬ 
mension: the mind. 

Back on land, guerrilla warfare too demonstrates this evolution toward 
abstraction. T. E. Lawrence was perhaps the first modem strategist to de- 


OHAKAOTKB AKMON 

To carry out the 
instinctual inhibition 
demanded by the 
modern world and to 
be able to cope with the 
energy stasis which 
results from this inhibi¬ 
tion, the ego has to 
undergo a change. The 
ego, i.e.. that part of 
the person that is 
exposed to danger, 
becomes rigid , as we 
say , when it is continu¬ 
ally subjected to the 
same or similar 
conflicts between need 
and a fear-inducing 
outer world. It acquires 
in this process a 
chronic, automatically 
functioning mode of 
reaction, i.e. its “ char¬ 
acter .: ” It is as if the 
affective personality 
armored itself as if the 
hard shell it develops 
were intended to deflect 
and weaken the blows 
of the outer world as 
well as the clamoring 
of the inner needs. This 
armoring makes the 
person less sensitive to 
unpleasure, but also 
restricts his lib id hut l 
and aggressive motility 
and thus reduces his 
capacity for achieve¬ 
ment and pleasure. We 
say the ego has r become 
less flexible and more 
rigid , and that (he abil¬ 
ity to regulate the 
energy economy 
depends on the extent 
of the armoring. 

Wilhelm Reich. 
1897-1957 


LAW 48 425 



velop the theory behind this kind of warfare, and to put it into practice. His 
ideas influenced Mao, who found in his writings an uncanny Western 
equivalent to wei-chi . Lawrence was working with Arabs fighting for their 
territory against the Turks. His idea was to make the Arabs blend into the 
vast desert, never providing a target, never collecting together in one place. 
As the Turks scrambled to fight this vaporous army, they spread them¬ 
selves thin, wasting energy in moving from place to place. They had the su¬ 
perior firepower but the Arabs kept the initiative by playing cat and 
mouse, giving the Turks nothing to hold on to, destroying their morale. 
“Most wars were wars of contact... Ours should be a war of detachment,” 
Lawrence wrote. “We were to contain the enemy by the silent threat of a 
vast unknown desert, not disclosing ourselves till we attacked.* 

This is the ultimate form of strategy. The war of engagement has be¬ 
come far too dangerous and cosdy; indirection and elusiveness yield far 
better results at a much lower cost. The main cost, in fact, is mental—the 
thinking it takes to align your forces in scattered patterns, and to under¬ 
mine the minds and psychology of your opponents. And nothing will infu¬ 
riate and disorient them more than formlessness. In a world where wars of 
detachment are the order of the day, formlessness is crucial. 

The first psychological requirement of formlessness is to train yourself 
to take nothing personally. Never show any defensiveness. When you act 
defensive, you show your emotions, revealing a clear form, Yonr oppo¬ 
nents will realize they have hit a nerve, an Achilles’ heel. And they will hit 
it again and again. So train yourself to take nothing personally. Never let 
anyone get your back up. Be like a slippery ball that cannot be held: Let no 
one know what gets to you, or where your weaknesses lie. Make your face 
a formless mask and you will infuriate and disorient your scheming col¬ 
leagues and opponents. 

One man who used this technique was Baron James Rothschild. A 
German Jew in Paris, in a culture decidedly unfriendly to foreigners, Roth¬ 
schild never took any attack on him personally or showed he had been 
hurt in any way. He furthermore adapted himself to the political climate, 
whatever it was—the stiffly formal Restoration monarchy of Louis XVIII, 
the bourgeois reign of Louis-Philippe, the democratic revolution of 1848, 
the upstart Louis-Napoleon crowned emperor in 1852. Rothschild ac¬ 
cepted them one and all, and blended in. He could afford to appear hypo¬ 
critical or opportunistic because he was valued for his money, not his 
politics; his money was the currency of power. While he adapted and 
thrived, outwardly never showing a form, all the other great families that 
had begun the century immensely wealthy were ruined in the period’s 
complicated shifts and turns of fortune. Attaching themselves to the past, 
they revealed their embrace of a form. 

Throughout history, the formless style of ruling has been most adeptly 
practiced by the queen who reigns alone. A queen is in a radically different 
position from a king; because she is a woman, her subjects and courtiers 
are likely to doubt her ability to rule, her strength of character. If she favors 



one side in some ideological struggle, she is said to be acting out of emo¬ 
tional attachment Yet if she represses her emotions and plays the authori¬ 
tarian, in the male fashion, she arouses worse criticism still. Either by 
nature or by experience, then, queens tend to adopt a flexible style of gov¬ 
erning that in the end often proves more powerful than the more direct, 
male form. 

Two female leaders exemplifying the formless style of rule are Queen 
Elizabeth of England and Empress Catherine the Great of Russia. In the vi¬ 
olent wars between Catholics and Protestants, Elizabeth steered a middle 
course. She avoided alliances that would commit her to one side, and that 
over time would harm the country. She managed to keep her country at 
peace until it was strong enough for war. Her reign was one of the most glo¬ 
rious in history because of her incredible capacity to adapt and her flexible 
ideology. 

Catherine the Great too evolved an improvisatory style of governing. 
After she deposed her husband, Emperor Peter II, taking sole control of 
Russia in 1762, no one thought she would survive. But she had no precon¬ 
ceived ideas, no philosophy or theory to dictate her policies. Although a 
foreigner (she came from Germany), she understood Russia’s moods, and 
how it was changing over the years. “One must govern in such a way that 
one’s people think they themselves want to do what one commands them 
to do,” she said, Mid to do this she had to be always a step ahead of their 
desires and to adapt to their resistance. By never forcing the issue, she re¬ 
formed Russia in a strikingly short period of time. 

This feminine, formless style of ruling may have emerged as a way of 
prospering under difficult circumstances, but it has proved immensely se¬ 
ductive to those who have served under it. Being fluid, it is relatively easy 
for its subjects to obey, for they feel less coerced, less bent to their ruler’s 
ideology. It also opens up options where an adherence to a doctrine closes 
them off. Without committing to one side, it allows the ruler to play one 
enemy off another. Rigid rulers may seem strong, but with time their in¬ 
flexibility wears on the nerves, and their subjects find ways to push them 
from the stage. Flexible, formless rulers will be much criticized, but they 
will endure, and people will eventually come to identify with them, since 
they are as their subjects are—changing with the wind, open to circum¬ 
stance. 

Despite upsets and delays, the permeable style of power generally tri¬ 
umphs in the end, just as Athens eventually won victory over Sparta 
through its money and its culture. When you find yourself in conflict with 
someone stronger and more rigid, allow them a momentary victory. Seem 
to bow to their superiority. Then, by being formless and adaptable, slowly 
insinuate yourself into their soul. This way you will catch them off guard, 
for rigid people are always ready to ward off direct blows but are helpless 
against the subtle and insinuating. To succeed at such a strategy you must 
play the chameleon—conform on the surface, while breaking down your 
enemy from the inside. 



For centuries the Japanese would accept foreigners graciously, and ap¬ 
peared susceptible to foreign cultures and influences. Joao Rodriguez, a 
Portuguese priest who arrived in Japan in 1577 and lived there for many 
years, wrote, “I am flabbergasted by the Japanese willingness to try and ac¬ 
cept everything Portuguese.” He saw Japanese in the streets wearing Por¬ 
tuguese clothing, with rosary beads at their necks and crosses at their hips. 
This might seem like a weak, mutable culture, but Japan’s adaptability 
actually protected the country from having an alien culture imposed by 
military invasion. It seduced the Portuguese and other Westerners into be¬ 
lieving the Japanese were yielding to a superior culture when actually the 
foreign culture’s ways were merely a fashion to be donned and doffed. 
Under the surface, Japanese culture thrived. Had the Japanese been rigid 
about foreign influences and tried to fight them off, they might have suf¬ 
fered the injuries that the West inflicted on China. That is the power of 
formlessness—it gives the aggressor nothing to react against, nothing to hit. 

In evolution, largeness is often the first step toward extinction. What is 
immense and bloated has no mobility, but must constantly feed itself. The 
unintelligent are often seduced into believing that size connotes power, the 
bigger the better. 

In 483 B.C., King Xerxes of Persia invaded Greece, believing he could 
conquer the country in one easy campaign. After all, he had the largest 
army ever assembled for one invasion—the historian Herodotus estimated 
it at over more than five million. The Persians planned to build a bridge 
across the Hellespont to overrun Greece from the land, while their equally 
immense navy would pin the Greek ships in harbor, preventing their 
forces from escaping to sea. The plan seemed sure, yet as Xerxes prepared 
the invasion, his adviser Artabanus warned his master of grave misgivings: 
“Hie two mightiest powers in the world are against you,” he said. Xerxes 
laughed—what powers could match his gigantic army? “I will tell you what 
they are,” answered Artabanus. “The land and the sea.” There were no safe 
harbors large enough to receive Xerxes’ fleet. And the more land the Per¬ 
sians conquered, and the longer their supply lines stretched, the more ru¬ 
inous the cost of feeding this immense army would prove. 

Thinking his adviser a coward, Xerxes proceeded with the invasion. 
Yet as Artabanus predicted, bad weather at sea decimated the Persian fleet, 
which was too large to take shelter in any harbor. On land, meanwhile, the 
Persian army destroyed everything in its path, which only made it impossi¬ 
ble to feed, since the destruction included crops and stores of food. It was 
also an easy and slow-moving target. The Greeks practiced all kinds of de¬ 
ceptive maneuvers to disorient the Persians. Xerxes’ eventual defeat at the 
hands of the Greek allies was an immense disaster. The story is emblematic 
of all those who sacrifice mobility for size: The flexible and fleet of foot will 
almost always win, for they have more strategic options. The more gigantic 
the enemy, the easier it is to induce collapse. 

The need for formlessness becomes greater the older we get, as we 
grow more likely to become set in our ways and assume too rigid a form. 



We become predictable, always the first sign of decrepitude. And pre¬ 
dictability makes us appear comical. Although ridicule and disdain might 
seem mild forms of attack, they are actually potent weapons, and will even¬ 
tually erode a foundation of power. An enemy who does not respect you 
will grow bold, and boldness makes even the smallest animal dangerous. 

The late-eighteenth-century court of France, as exemplified by Marie- 
Antoinette, had become so hopelessly tied to a rigid formality that the 
average Frenchman thought it a silly relic. This depreciation of a centuries- 
old institution was the first sign of a terminal disease, for it represented a 
symbolic loosening of the people’s ties to monarchy. As the situation wors¬ 
ened, Marie-Antoinette and King Louis XVI grew only more rigid in their 
adherence to the past—and quickened their path to the guillotine. King 
Charles I of England reacted similarly to the tide of democratic change 
brewing in England in the 1630s: He disbanded Parliament, and his court 
rituals grew increasingly formal and distant. He wanted to return to an 
older style of ruling, with adherence to all kinds of petty protocol. His 
rigidity only heightened the desire for change. Soon, of course, he was 
swept up in a devastating civil war, and eventually he lost his head to the 
executioner’s axe. 

As you get older, you must rely even less on the past. Be vigilant lest 
the form your character has taken makes you seem a relic. It is not a matter 
of mimicking the fashions of youth—that is equally worthy of laughter. 
Rather your mind must constantly adapt to each circumstance, even the in¬ 
evitable change that the time has come to move over and let those of 
younger age prepare for their ascendancy. Rigidity will only make you 
look uncannily like a cadaver. 

Never forget, though, that formlessness is a strategic pose. It gives you 
room to create tactical surprises; as your enemies struggle to guess your 
next move, they reveal their own strategy, putting them at a decided disad¬ 
vantage. It keeps the initiative on your side, putting your enemies in the 
position of never acting, constantly reacting. It foils their spying and intelli¬ 
gence. Remember: Formlessness is a tool. Never confuse it with a go-with- 
the-flow style, or with a religious resignation to the twists of fortune. You 
use formlessness, not because it creates inner harmony and peace, but be¬ 
cause it will increase your power. 

Finally, learning to adapt to each new circumstance means seeing 
events through your own eyes, and often ignoring the advice that people 
constantly peddle your way. It means that ultimately you must throw out 
the laws that others preach, and the books they write to tell you what to do, 
and the sage advice of the elder. “The laws that govern circumstances are 
abolished by new circumstances,” Napoleon wrote, which means that it is 
up to you to gauge each new situation. Rely too much on other people’s 
ideas and you end up taking a form not of your own making. Too much re¬ 
spect for other people’s wisdom will make you depreciate your own. Be 
brutal with the past, especially your own, and have no respect for the 
philosophies that are foisted on you from outside. 



Image: Mercury. The winged messenger, 

god of commerce, patron saint of thieves, 
gamblers, and all those who deceive through 

swiftness. The day Mercury was bom he invented 
the lyre; by that evening he had stolen the cattle of 
Apollo, He would scour the world, assuming 

whatever form he desired. Like the liquid metal 

named after him, he embodies the elusive, 
the ungraspable—the power of formlessness. 


Authority: Therefore the consummation of forming an army is to arrive 
at formlessness. Victory in war is not repetitious, but adapts its form 
endlessly. ... A military force has no constant formation, water has no 
constant shape: The ability to gain victory by changing and adapting ac¬ 
cording to the opponent is called genius. (Sun-tzu, fourth century B.c.) 


REVERSAL 

Using space to disperse and create an abstract pattern should not mean for¬ 
saking the concentration of your power when it is valuable to you. Form¬ 
lessness makes your enemies hunt all over for you, scattering their own 
forces, mental as well as physical. When you finally engage them, though, 
hit them with a powerful, concentrated blow. That is how Mao succeeded 
against die Nationalists: He broke their forces into small, isolated units, 
which he then could easily overwhelm with a strong attack. The law of con¬ 
centration prevailed. 

When you play with formlessness, keep on top of the process, and 
keep your long-term strategy in mind. When you assume a form and go on 
the attack, use concentration, speed, and power. As Mao said, “ When we 
light you, we make sure you can’t get away.” 



SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Aesop. Fables of Aesop. Translated by S. A. Hanford. New York: Penguin 
Books, 1954. 

Bloodworth, Dennis and Ching Ping. The Chinese Machiavelli. New York: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1976. 

Bowyer, J. Barton. Cheating: Deception in War and Magic, Games and Sports, 
Sex and Religion, Business and Con Games, Politics and Espionage, Art and 
Science. New York: St Martin’s Press, 1982. 

Castiglione, Baldesar. The Book of the Courtier. Translated by George Bull. 
New York: Penguin Books, 1976. 

Clausewitz, Carl von. On War. Edited and translated by Michael Howard 
and Peter Paret. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1976. 

Elias, Norbert The Court Society. Translated by Edmund Jephcott Oxford: 
Basil Blackwell Publishers, 1983. 

de Francesco, Grete. The Power of the Charlatan. Translated by Miriam 
Beard. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1939. 

Haley, Jay. The Power Tactics of Jesus Christ and Other Essays. New York: 
W. W. Norton, 1989. 

Han-fei-tzu. The Complete Works of Han-fei-tzu . Translated by W. K. Liao. 

2 volumes. London: Arthur Probsthain, 1959. 

Herodotus. The Histories . Translated by Aubrey de Selincourt New York: 
Penguin Books, 1987. 

Isaacson, Walter, Kissinger: A Biography. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992. 
La Fontaine, Jean de. Selected Fables. Translated by James Michie. New 
York: Penguin Books, 1982. 

Lenclos, Ninon de. Life, Letters and Epicurean Philosophy of Ninon de Lenclos, 
The Celebrated Beauty of the 17th Century. Chicago: Lion Publishing Co., 
1903. 

Ludwig, Emil. Bismarck: The Story of a Fighter. Translated by Eden and 
Cedar Paul. Boston: Little, Brown, 1928. 

Machiavelli, Niccolo, The Prince and The Discourses. Translated by Luigi 
Ricci and Christian E. Detmold. New York: Modem Library, 1940. 
Mao Tse-tung. Selected Military Writings of Mao Tse-tung. Beijing: Foreign 
Languages Press, 1963. 

Millan, Betty. Monstrous Regiment: Women Rulers in Mens Worlds. Windsor 
Forest, Berks, U.K.: Kensal Press, 1983. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 431 



Montaigne, Michel de. The Compute Essays. Translated by M. A. Screech. 
New York: Penguin Books, 1987. 

Mrazek, Col. James. The Art of Winning Wars. New York: Walker and Com¬ 
pany, 1968. 

Nash, Jay Robert. Hustlers and Con Mm. New York: M. Evans and Co., 
1976. 

Nietzsche, Friedrich. The Birth of Tragedy and The Genealogy of Morals. Trans¬ 
lated by Francis Golffing. Garden City: Doubleday Anchor Books, 
1956. 

Orieux, Jean. Talleyrand: The Art of Survival. Translated by Patricia Wolf. 
New York: Knopf, 1974. 

Plutarch. Makers of Rome. Translated by Ian Scott-Kilvert. New York: Pen¬ 
guin Books, 1965. 

-. The Rise and Fall of Athens. Translated by Ian Scott-Kilvert New York: 

Penguin Books, 1960. 

Rebhom, Wayne A. Foxes and Lions: MachiavellVs Confidence Men. Ithaca: 
Cornell University Fkess, 1988. 

de Retz, Cardinal. Memoirs of Jean Francois Paul de Gondi , Cardinal de Retz . 

2 vols. London: J. M. Dent & Sons, 1917. 

Sadler, A. L. Cha-no-yu: The Japanese Tea Ceremony. Rutland, Vermont: 
Charles E. Tuttle Company, 1962. 

Scharfstein, Ben-Ami. Amoral Politics. Albany: State University of New York 
Press, 1995. 

Scheibe, Karl E. Mirrors, Masks, Lies and Secrets. New York: Praeger Publish¬ 
ers, 1979. 

Schopenhauer, Arthur. The Wisdom of Life and Counsels and Maxims. Trans¬ 
lated by T. Bailey Saunders. Amherst, New York: Prometheus Books, 
1995. 

Senger, Harro von. The Book of Stratagems: Tactics for Triumph and Survival. 
Edited and translated by Myron B. Gubitz. New York: Penguin Books, 
1991. 

Siu, R. G. H. The Craft of Power. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1979. 
Sun-tzu. The Art of War. Translated by Thomas Cleary, Boston: Shambhala, 
1988. 

Thucydides. The History of the Peloponnesian War, Translated by Rex Warner. 
New York: Penguin Books, 1972. 

Weil, “Yellow Kid.” The Con Game and ‘Yellow Kid” Weil: The Autobiography 
of the Famous Con Artist as told to W.T. Brannon. New York: Dover Publi¬ 
cations, 1974. 

Zagorin, Perez. Ways of Lying: Dissimulation, Persecution and Conformity in 
Early Modem Europe. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1990. 


432 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 



INDEX 


Italic page references indicate 
sidebars. 

Abraham, 73-74 
absence, 364 
using to increase respect 
and honor, 115-22 
abstraction, 425-26 
Academie Frangaise, 

306 

accomplishments: 
as effortless, 245-53 
and following a famous 
predecessor, 347-57 
achievements of others, 
using, 60 

acting, 196,198, 199 
action (s): 

entering with boldness, 
227-35 

security and, 355 
waiting and, 296 
winning through argu ¬ 
ment vs., 69-75,378 
Mam's Curse (Yeats), 250 
adaptability, 419 
admiration, 405 
Aeschylus, 405 
Aesop, 96 ‘ 140,233, 237, 
335,361,370 
African folktale, 10 
Aglauros, 403-4 
Aguirre, Lope de, 138-40 
Aiken, John, 172-73 
Albert, Prince, 55 
Albizzi family, 403-4 
Albrecht, King, 361 
alchemy, 264-66,270 
Alctbiades, 148,360, 
383-82 

Alen<jon, Duke of, 146, 

277 

Alexander I, Czar, 63 


Alexander III “the Great,” 
King, 47,182-83, 
331-32, 355,356, 
371-72 

father and, 350-52 
Alexander VI, Pope, 150, 
151,176-77,202,308 
Alexandra, Czarina, 364 
Alfonso I, King, 187 
Algardi, Alessandro, 357 
All, Muhammad, 129 
Always say less than nec¬ 
essary (Law 4), 

31-36 

Amasis, 72-73 
American Institute of 

Electrical Engineers, 
58 

American Museum, 45-46 
Amschel, Mayer, 173 
Ancient Chinese Parables (Yu 
Hsiu Sen, ed.), 117 
anger, xix, xx. 332 
repression of, 329 
and stirring up waters to 
catch fish, 325-32 
tantrums, 327, 329, 331 
animal magnetism, 

223-24 

“Animals Stricken with the 
Plague, The” (La 
Fontaine}, 38-40 
Anjou, Duke of, 146-47 
Anne, Queen, 337 
Anne of Cleves, 394 
Antony, Marc, 207, 

310-11 

appearance(s), xx, xxi, 44, 
143, 147,204,251, 
364 

cat’s-paw and, 209 
jokes about, 181, 185 
of perfection, 400-409 


spectacles and, 309 
Arabs, 426 

Aretino, Pietro, 46,48, 

175,232,288-89, 

307 

patronage strategy of, 
338-40 
argument: 
emotions and, 322 
winning through actions 
vs,, 69-75,378 
Aristides, 359 
aristocratic pose, 282-90 
Aristotle, 182 83 
Arlen, Michael, 32 
Armenian Folk-tales and Fa¬ 
bles, Retold by Charles 
Downing, 257 
armor, protective, 421, 
422, 425 

Arnold, Philip, 157-59, 
160-61 

arrogance, 287 
arrogant and proud man, 
dealing with, 138 
arrow, image of, 176 
Arsinoe, 207 
Artabanus, 428 
art dealers, 142-43 
Duveen, see Duveen, 
Joseph 

Picasso and, 127-28, 

149 

Vollard, 260 
artists, Renaissance, 251 
Art of Cross-Examina tion, 
The (Wellman), 412 
Art of War, The (Sun-tzu), 
105, 111 

Art of War, The (Zhang 
Yu), 67 

Art of Winning Wars, The 
(Mrazek), 424 



asking for too little, 234 
“Ass and the Gardener, 
The” {Indian fable), 
302 

associations: 

in mirrored situations, 
390-91 

with unhappy and un¬ 
lucky people, 

76-81 

Assume formlessness (Law 
48), 419-30 
Assyrians, 118,412 
Astyages, King, 411 
Atahualpa, King, 359, 360, 
365 

Atheism Conquered (Cam- 
panella), 320-21, 

322 

Athens, 97-98, 148, 
164-65,167,203, 
318,354,359-61, 
407,416,420-22 
banishment in, 359, 

360, 361 

Sicily invaded by, 172, 
241-42,305,381, 

416 

war between Sparta 
and, 421-22,427 
attacks, 419 
deflecting of, 306 
fast, 68 

taking personally, 426 
attention: 

courting of, 44-55, 191, 
194,229 

paid to an enemy, 300 
unconventional ideas 
and, 317 

audacity (boldness), 
227-35, 288, 429 
development of, 

233-34 

hesitation compared 
with, 228-29 
Augusta, Queen, 279-80 
Augustus, Emperor, 353 
Auretian, Emperor, 
393-94 

Austria, 159-60, 239-41 
Ausubel, Nathan, 153-54 , 
201,223-24 
authority, fear and, 228 
autonomy, 152,153, 154 
Avery, Ephraim K., 45 


Avoid stepping into a 
great man’s shoes 
(Law 41), 347-57 
Azebu Gallas, 328 
Aztecs, 203,365 

Bacon, Francis, 407 
bad news, bearing of, 180 
bait, 62-68 

resisting, 296-97 
Balaun, Guillaume de, 
116-17 

Balboa, Vasco Nunez de, 
59,237-39 

Balcha, Dejazmach, 26-27 
Balzac, Honore de, xx 
banishment, 358,361, 363 
in Athens, 359, 360, 361 
Bardas, 9,13 
bargain demons, 334-35 
Barjac, Pierre de, 116 
Barlow, Samuel L., 157 
Barnes, E. W M 422 
Bamum, P. X, 30, 42, 
45-47,253, 270,346 
Barry, Madame du, 
348-39 

Basilius, Emperor, 9-10 
Batchelor, Charles, 57 
Bathsheba, and David, 212 
Bavaria, Duke of, 265, 270 
Bay of Pigs, 305 
beau geste, 198 
Beauvallon, Jean-Baptiste 
Rosemond de, 77 
behaving like others, 
while thinking as 
you like, 317-24 
Behind the Scenes of Royal 
Palaces in Korea (Ha 
Tae-Hung), 230-32 
Bekbulatovich, Simeon, 
384-85 
Belgium, 240 
belief, people’s need for, 
215-26 

Belloc, Hilaire, 301 
Bengal, 352 
Benjamin, Walter, 240 
Berenice, 206 
Bergman, Ingmar, 408 
Bernini, Pietro, 357 
Be royal in your own fash¬ 
ion: act like a king to 
be treated like one 
(Law 34), 282-90 


Bertrand, Louis, 33 
Best Fables of La Fontaine, 
The, see I^a Fontaine, 
Jean de, fables of 
Bible, 112 
Genesis, 406 
Kings, 23-24 
Matthew, 169 
Second Book of 
Samuel, 212 

Billy Budd (Melville), 408 
Birth, Jonathan, 328 
Bismarck, Otto von, 

19-20, 60, 64,85, 
239-41,242-43, 
279-80,323 

Austrian negotiator and, 
159-60 

goal of, 240-41,242-43 
rise to power of, 83-84, 
85 

role-playing of, 198 
speeches of, 19-20,21, 
279 

Virchow and, 255 
Bisticci, Vespasiano da, 
404 

Blacks, the, and the 

Whites, 153,361-62 
black sheep, image of, 

324 

blame: 

scapegoat and, 201-5, 
214 

taking, 214 
blending in, 29, 317 
Blenheim, 337-38 
Biome, Count, 160 
Bloodworth, Dennis, 
294-95 

Blue Boy, The (Gainsbor¬ 
ough), 278-79 
Bogart, Humphrey, 87 
boldness, 227-35,288, 

429 

development of, 

233-34 

hesitation compared 
with, 228-29 
Boleyn, Anne, 303, 304, 
393 

Bonaparte, Louis, 242 
Boniface VIII (Cardinal 
Gaetani), 361-62 
Book of Fine Rings, A 
(Musashi), 78, 379 



Book of Government or Rules 
for Kings, The (al- 
Mulk), 338-40 
Book of the Courtier, The 
(Castiglione), 250-51 
Book of the Huainan Masters, 
The, 420 

Borgia, Cesare, 5, 68,151, 
152, 176-77, 202, 

308, 415-16 
de Oreo and, 202-3, 

204 

negotiations of, 208 
at Sinigaglia, 108-10 
Boreas, The (Cloulas), 
108-10 

Borri, Francesco 
Giuseppe, 90, 

219-20 

Borromini, Francesco, 357 
Bourbon, Antoine de, 277 
Bourbon, Henri de, 277 
“Boy and the Nettle, The” 
(Aesop), 233 
boyars, 230-31,255-56, 
384,385,407 
Bragadino, II, 264-66, 

267,270 

Bramante, Donato, 407, 
409 

Brecht, Bertolt, 165-67, 
168, 197-98,322-23 
Brummell, George 
“Beau,* 185 
Brunelleschi, Filippo, 
66-67, 404 
Brutus, 80, 193 
buried treasure, 334-35 
Burton, Richard, 198 
Butler, Benjamin, 157 
Byron, George Gordon, 
Lord, 185 

Caesar, Julius, 80,323, 

353 

Cleopatra and, 193, 

198,206-7,353 
death of, 193 
at Pharsalia, 278-79 
public image of, 192-93 
Rubicon crossing of, 

192, 198 
Caligula, 324 
Callisthenes, 182-83 
“Camel and the Floating 
Sticks, The” (La 


Fontaine), 116 
Camillus, 93 
CampaneUa, Tommaso, 
319-21,322,323 
Capone, Al, 90,91 
Caravan of Dreams (Shah), 
119, 238-39,3 05 
Careme, Marie-Antoine, 
341 

Carmagnola, Count of, 83, 
84 

Carpi, Ugo da, 46 
Carranza, Venustiano, 301, 
302 

Carroll, Lewis, 379 
Casanova, Giovanni, 42, 
175, 192, 233,334 
Cassius, 80,193 
Castiglione, Baldassare, 9 > 
43,47 

on nonchalance, 

250-51, 252 

Castlereagh, Viscount, 64 
Castracani, Castruccio, 
96-97, 153 
Castro, Fidel, 305 
cat, image of, 398 
Catherine de 1 Medicis, 
Queen, 214,277-78 
Catherine of Aragon, 
303-4, 393 

Catherine the Great, Em¬ 
press, 427 

Catholicism, 319-21,328, 
361,393-94 
cat’s-paw, 206-14 
image of, 213 
mistakes in using, 214 
two uses of, 209 
“Cat That Walked By 
Himself, The” 
(Kipling), 84 

Cavaignac, Louis Eugene, 
242 

Cecil, Robert, 364 
center of power, striking 
at, 358-66 
change, 425 

fantasy of transforma¬ 
tion vs., 267 
reform and, 392-99 
Cha-no-yu (Japanese tea 
ceremony), 5,209, 
210, 246, 306, 313, 
326, 343,344, 

388 


Cha-no-yu: TheJapanese Tea 
Ceremony (Sadler), 
246-47, 313, 326-27 
Chao, 186 

Chapman, Walker, 138-40 
character, 191,195 
charlatanism, 216-19 
Charles I, King, 290, 429 
Charles V, Emperor, 47, 
121, 152, 175,340 
Charles IX, King, 214,277 
Charles X, King, 283 
Charleval, 257 
Chateauroux, Duchesse 
de, 413 

“Chelm Justice* (Yiddish 
folktale), 201 
Cheng, 141-42 
Ch’en Po-ta, 204 
chess, 126, 352-53, 423, 
424 

World Championship 
of, 124-26 
Chesterfield, Philip 

Dormer Stanhope, 
Lord, xviii, 144 
Chesterton, G. K., 301 
Chiang Kai-shek, 112, 
208-9,422-23, 424 
Ch’ien Shu, King, 11 
Chih, Earl, 94 
childhood weaknesses, 
272-73 
Chin, 153 

Ch’in, Emperor, 395 
China, 10,11, 14,91,92, 
111, 186 

Chiang Kai-shek in, 

112,208-9,422-23, 
424 

Chin/Hsing struggle in, 
153 

Ch’in Shih Huang Ti in, 
131-32 

Chuko Liang in, 38-39, 
211-12,370-71, 
372-73,395, 396 

Ch’ung-erh in, 141-42 

Communists vs. Nation¬ 
alists in, 112,208-9, 
422-23,424,430 

Emperor Sung in, 10—12 

Empress Wu in, 110-11, 
113 

Han Dynasty in, 10, 

183,201 



China (coni) 

Hsiang Yu/Liu Pang 
struggle in, 108-10 
Japan’s invasion of, 14, 
112,208-9, 422 
King Goujian in, 168 
Kissinger and, 61, 149 
Mao Tse-tung in, see 
Mao Tse-tung 
Mongol invasion of, 99 
Nixon’s visit to, 61 
Ts’ao Ts’ao in, 201-2, 
203,330,372-73 
21 Histories in, 183 
Wang Mang in, 397 
War of the Three King¬ 
doms in, 38 
Wei kingdom in, 41 
Wu/Middle Kingdom 
war in, 172 

Chinese Looking Glass, The 
(Bloodworth), 294-95 
Chinese parables, 117, 
337-38 

Chinese sayings, 152, 160, 
361 

Ch'in Shih Huang Ti, Em¬ 
peror, 131—32 
choice, controlling options 
in, 254-62 

Choiseul, Etienne de, 
348-49 

Chopin, Frederic, 194 
Chosroes II, King, 104-5 
Chou Yung, 296 
Christianity, 393 
Christina, Queen, 220 
Christmas, 393-94 
Chuko Liang, 38-39, 
211-12, 370-71, 
372-73 

Mao Tse-tung and, 395, 
396 

Ch’ung-erh, 141-42 
Churchill, Winston, 106 
painting of, 188-89 
Church of England, 304 
Ch’u-Ts’ai, Yelu, 99 
Cicero, 134 
Cimon, 407 

“Citizen and the Traveller, 
The” (Stevenson), 
322 

Civil War, 127 
Sherman’s march in, 
260-61 


Claudius I, Emperor, 160 
Clausewitz, Carl von, 112, 
174, 237, 422 
clean hands, 200-214 
Cleary, Thomas, 25, 138 
Cleisthenes, 285-87 
Clement VII, Pope, 303, 
304,393 

Cleopatra, 193,198, 

206-8,209,353 
Antony and, 207, 

310-11 

Cloulas, Ivan, 108-10 
Cohn, Harry, 86-87 
Colbert, Jean-Baptiste, 2, 

5 

Coligny, Gaspard de, 214 
Cologne (Turner), 188 
color, 314 

Columbia Pictures, 86, 87 
Columbus, Christopher, 
234, 237, 284-86 
Columbus Strategy, 288 
common touch, 317,323 
commitment, to others, 
145-55 

Communists, 176, 323 
Chinese, 112, 208-9, 
422-23, 424; see also 
Mao Tse-tung 
House Un-American 
Activities Committee 
and, 86-87, 165-67, 
197-98,322-23 
compelling spectacles, cre¬ 
ation of, 309-16 
con artists, 52, 90, 91, 260, 
268,323,334 
aristocratic front used 
by, 288 

Arnold and Slack, 
157-59, 160-61 
boldness in, 228 
Bragadino, 264-66, 

267, 270 

Crowningsfield, 92 
free lunch and, 346 
Furey’s ring of, 140-41 
Hartzell, 268 
isolation used by, 364 
Lustig, see Lustig, Victor 
Stavisky, 260 
Weil, see Weil, Joseph 
“Yellow Kid” 
concealment: 

of mistakes, by use of 


scapegoat, 201-5, 

214 

of tricks and techniques, 
245, 247, 251-52 
Conceal your intentions 
(Law 3), 16-30 
Concentrate your forces 
(Law 23), 171-77 
Concini, Concino, 274, 

275 

Conde, Louis, Prince of, 
277 

Condivi, Ascanio, 406-8 
condoltieri (mercenary sol¬ 
diers), 83, 108-10 
conflict, fantasy of union 
vs., 268 

conformity, outward dis¬ 
play of, 317-24,398 
Confucius, 131, 353, 395, 
396, 397 

Congress of Vienna, 63, 
94,104, 184-85 
Conquest of Peru, The 
(Prescott), 359-60 
conservatism, 394, 398, 
425 

Constantine, Emperor, 
314, 393 

contempt, 305,307,308 
contrasts, between overt 
traits and weak¬ 
nesses, 273 

Control the options: get 
others to play with 
the cards you deal 
(Law 31), 254-62 
controversy, 48 
cord that binds, image of, 
100 

Corella, Michelotto, 

109-10 

Corfu (Corcyra), 97-98 
Corinth, 97-98 
Coriolanus, Gna^us Mar- 
cius, 32-33 

Cortes, Hernando, 365 
Counter-Reformation, 319 
court, courtiers, courting, 
xvii-xviii, 146-49, 
178-90,211,398 
cat’s-paw and, 212 
nonchalance in, 250-51 
symbols and, 315 
Court Artist, The (Wamke), 
46-47 



Court attention at all cost 
{Law 6), 44-55 
Courtier’s Mirror, 378,388 
Craft of Power, The (Siu), 
207-8,247-48,295 
Create compelling specta¬ 
cles (Law 37), 

309-16 
creativity, 425 
credit, for work done by 
others, 56-61 
criticism, of those above 
you, 181 
Croesus, 411 
Cromwell, Oliver, 290 
Cromwell, Thomas, 
393-94,398 
cross and the sun, image 
of, 316 

cross-examination, 412 
“Crow and the Sheep, 
The” (Aesop), 140 
“Crow-Hen, the Cobra, 
and the Jackal, The” 
(Panchatantra tale), 
207-8 

crown, image of, 289 
Crowningsfield, John, 92 
Croy, Due de, 414 
Crush your enemy totally 
(Law 15), 107-14 
Cuba, 305 

cultlike following, creation 
of, 215-26 
culture(s): 

different, 267-68,319 
vacuums in, 353-54 
cyclone, image of, 128 
cynicism, 181 
Cyprus, 264, 318 
Cyrus the Great, 368-69, 
411-12 

Daizen, Kuriyama, 209-11 
Damon, 359-60 
dance of the veils, image 
of, 54 

danger, in isolation, 

130-36 

Dante Alighieri, 361-62 
Darien, 237,238 
Darnley, Lord, 147 
Darwin, Charles, 398 
David, and Bathsheba, 212 
David and Goliath Strat¬ 
egy, 288 


D&vila, Pedro Arias (Pe- 
drarias), 238,239 
deadlines, setting for oth¬ 
ers, 297-98 
death: 

absence and, 120 
fantasy of reversal of, 
268-69 

Deceiver’s Mirror, 379, 
388-89 

deception, xx-xxi, 23, 
27-28, 36 

contr olling the options 
and, 254-62 
courtiership and, 190 
cultlike following and, 
216 

distraction and, 91, 92 
gifts and, 92 
imagery and, 311 
intelligence and, 161 
isolation in, 364 
kindness and, 93 
mirror effect in, 376-91 
reputation for, 30, 42 
smoke screens in, 23, 

27,28, 29,30,36, 

129 

verbal argument and, 74 
decoyed objects of desire, 
17,21,28 

defects, shared, 81 
defensiveness, 426 
de Reury, Andre-Hercule, 
348 

de Gaulle, Charles, 315 
Deioces, 118-19, 120 
Denmark, 239,240 
de Oreo, Remirro, 202-3, 
204 

dependence: 
mutual, 88 
of others, 82-88 
Dermis Prole, The (Shah), 
336-37 
desire, 305 

Despise the free lunch 
(Law 40), 333-46 
diamondmine, 157-59 
Diana (roman goddess), 
312,313,314,315 
Diane de Poitiers, 9, 278, 
311-13,315 

Diderot, Denis, 195, 196 
dignity, 288, 331 
Dinocrates, 47 


di Prima, Diane, 337-38 
Disarm and infuriate with 
the mirror effect 
(Law 44), 376-91 
Discourses (Machiavelli), 
412-13 

Discover each man’s 
thumbscrew (Law 
33), 271-81 

Disdain things you cannot 
have: ignoring them 
is the best revenge 
(Law 36), 300-308 
dishonesty: 

reputation for, 30,42 
and selective honesty, 

89 

dispersion of forces, 

176-77 

displaying your talents, 
and outshining mas¬ 
ter, 1-7 

Disraeli, Benjamin, 74 
distance, in fantasy, 269 
distraction, in deception, 
91,92 

“Ditch High Priest” 
(Kenkd), 329 
Dodsley, Robert, 85, 296 
“Dog with the Cropped 
Ears, The” (La 
Fontaine), 420-21 
Do not build fortresses to 
protect yourself-iso- 
lation is dangerous 
(Law 18), 130-36 
Do not commit to anyone 
{Law 20), 145-55 
Do not go past the mark 
you aimed for: in 
victory, learn when 
to stop (Law 47), 
410-18 

Doria, Andrea, 108 
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, 355 
Downing, Charles, 256-57 
Drake swindle, 268 
drama, 197,199 
Drew, Daniel, 66 
du Barry, Madame, 
348-49 

Duchamp, Marcel, 35,53 
Dudevant, Aurore Bupin 
(George Sand), 
194-95,196,306 
Dudley, Robert, 146 



Dujarier, Alexandre, 77 
Dutch Lowlands, 146 
Duveen, Joseph, 102-3, 
120, 298 

Diirer painting and, 
161-62 

Ford and, 142-43 
Huntington and, 278-79 
Mellon and, 28, 102 
National Gallery of Art 
and, 28 

“Eagle and the Sow, The” 
(Tolstoy), 152 
economic scarcity, 120-21 
Edison, Thomas, 42-43, 
48,57,58 
Edison Medal, 58 
effort: 

excess of, in pleasing 
master, 416-17 
saving of, 209,211 
effortlessness, appearance 
of, 245-53 
Egypt, 206-7 
Eiffel Tower, 94,229-30 
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 
315, 353 

Elba, 63-64,184,294,379 
El Dorado, 237, 238, 
335-37 

Elizabeth I, Queen, 34, 
146-47, 148, 149, 

213, 364,406, 427 
“Elm-Tree and the Vine, 
The” (Dodsley), 85 
emotions, xix-xx 
appealing to, 367-75 
arguments and, 322 
control of, 152,153, 

155, 182, 196,243, 
330 

defensiveness and, 426 
forms and, 424 
hiding of, 321 
infectiousness of, 76 
money and, 342-43, 

344 

planning and, 243 
playing on, 93 
repression of, 329 
spectacle and, 316 
and stirring up waters to 
catch fish, 325-32 
as thumbscrews, 271, 
273,281 


time and, 295,296, 297 
uncontrollable, 273 
Enciso, Francisco Fernan¬ 
dez de, 237 

end, the, planning all the 
way to, 236-44 
end time, 296, 298-99 
enemies: 

attention paid to, 300 
crushing completely, 
107-14 

cultlike following and, 
216 

former friends, 109 
fortresses as protection 
from, 130-36 
isolating of, 358, 
363-64,366 
mirror effect and, 

376-91 

overreaction to moves 
of, 167 

reconciliation with, 109, 
111 

reputations of, 37, 40, 

42 

revenge of, 111, 114, 
261, 366 

self-destruction of, 114 
size of, 428 
stirring up anger in, 
325-32 

sympathizing with, 109 
using, 8-15 
winning over, 371-72 
energy, saving of, 209, 211 
England, 146, 147,239, 
240 

Washington and, 154 
Ennemoser, J., 221, 222 
Enter action with boldness 
(Law 28), 227-35 
entrances and exits, 198 
envy, 188,400,402-3, 
404, 405-6,407-9 
Epicurus, 319 
equality, xviii 
Erickson, Milton H., 
212-13,259,315, 

363 

mirroring used by, 
386-87 

Erie Railroad, 91-92 
Escorial, El, 353 
Essays in Idleness (Kenko), 
302-3,329,414 


Essex, Earl of, 34, 146, 364 
Este, Francesco d\ 186 
Este, Isabella d’, 150-52 
Ethiopia, 25,288,327-28 
Ethiopian proverb, 167 
exotica, 267-68,319 

Fabius, 53 

Fables (Aesop), 96, 140\ 
233, 237, 335, 361, 
370 

Fables (Birch), 328 
Fables (Dodsley), <95, 296 
Fables (La Fontaine), see La 
Fontaine, Jean de, fa¬ 
bles of 

Fables (Stevenson), 322 
Fables (Tolstoy), 83, 152, 
304, 411 

fables and folktales: 

“The Animals Stricken 
with the Plague,” 
38-40 

“The Ass and the Gar¬ 
dener,” 302 
“The Boy and the Net¬ 
tle,” 233 

“The Cat That Walked 
By Himself,” 84 
“Chelm Justice,” 201 
“The Chestnut and the 
Fig Tree,” 164 
“The Citizen and the 
Traveller,” 322 
“The Crow and the 
Sheep,” 140 
“The Crow-Hen, the 
Cobra, and the 
Jackal,” 207-8 
“The Dog with the 
Cropped Ears,” 
420-21 

“The Eagle and the 
Sow,” 152 

“The Elm Tree and the 
Vine,” 85 
“A Fool and a Wise 
Man,” 209-10 
“The Fox and the 
Grapes,” 301 
“The Fox and the 
Stork,” 380-81 
“The Funeral of the li¬ 
oness,” 264-65 
“The Gende Art of Per¬ 
suasion,” 370 



“The Goose and the 
Horse,” 172-73 
“The Greedy Man and 
the Envious Man,” 
401 

“The Indian Bird,” 
210-11 

“The King, the Sufi, and 
the Surgeon,” 
238-39 

“The Kites, the Crows, 
and the Fox,” 150-51 
“The Liar,” 256-57 
“The lion, the 
Chamois, and the 
Fox,” 272-73 
“The Man and His 
Shadow,” 306 
“The Man Who Loved 
Money Better Than 
life,” 337-38 
“The Merchant and His 
Friend,” 377-79 
“The Miser,” 335 
“The Monkey and the 
Cat," 206-7 
“The Monkey and the 
Peas,” 304 

“The Monkey and the 
Wasp,” 328 
“The Owl Who Was 
God,” 217-19 
“The Nut and the Cam¬ 
panile,” 77 
“The Peasant and the 
Apple Tree,” 96 
“The Power of a Lie,” 
223-24 

“The Price of Envy,” 
153-54 

“The Snake, the 
Farmer, and the 
Heron,” 10 
“The Tortoise, the Ele¬ 
phant, and the Hip¬ 
popotamus,” 57-58 
“The Trout and the 
Gudgeon,” 296 
“The Two Adventur¬ 
ers,” 228-29 
“The Two Dogs,” 
179-80 

“The Two Frogs,” 237 
“The Two Horses ” 83 
“The Vainglorious 
Cockerel,” 411 


“The Virtues of the 
Cock,” 117 
“The Wasp and the 
Prince,” 45 

“When the Waters Were 
Changed,” 319-20 
“The Wolves and the 
Sheep,” 361 
Fables from Boccaccio and 
Chaucer (Aikin), 
172-73 

Fables (Kriloff), 179-80, 
272-73,306 
facial expression, 28 
Fadiman, Clifton, 32, 165, 
255,258,301 
Faenza, 5 
Faliscans, 93 
fall of the favorite, 205 
false sincerity, 17,21-22,30 
familiarity, 123 
fantasies, playing to, 
263-70 

Fan Tseng, 108-9 
fates, intertwining of, 86 
father, image of, 355 
father figures: 

hostility' toward, 352 
stepping into shoes of, 
347-57 
favors, 346 

asking for, 181,187,417 
granting of, 210,211 
fear, 296 

boldness and, 228 
other people’s, vs. their 
love, 87 

Ferdinand, King, 303 
Ferrara, 150, 151 
fights, being drawn into, 
150-54 

Fischer, Bobby, 124-26 
“Flame-Colored Cloak, 
The” (Herodotus), 
341-43 
flattery, 180 
Flaubert, Gustave, 195 
Flemish Lowlands, 146 
flexibility, 244,297,425, 
427 

flock of fatted sheep, 
image of, 365 
Florence, 150,152,341, 
342, 361,398,403-4 
Blacks and Whites in, 
361-62 


fluidity, 419-30 
following, creation of, 
215-26 

“Fool and a Wise Man, A” 
(La Fontaine), 

209-10 

forced time, 296, 297-98 
forces: 

concentrating of, 171-77 
dispersion of, 176-77 
Ford, Gerald, 149 
Ford, Henry, 142-43 
foreign cultures, imitation 
of, 319 

Foreman, George, 129 
forgiveness, 214 
Forman, Simon, 146 
formlessness, 419-30 
Formosa, 267-68 
forms, 424-25 
fortress, image of, 136 
fortresses, 130-36 
fortunate people, associa¬ 
tion with, 76, 81 
Fouche, Joseph, 13, 
292-95,326,327 
Napoleon’s spying on, 

379- 80 

Fouquet, Nicolas, 2, 3, 5 
“Fox and the Grapes, 

The” (La Fontaine), 
301 

“Fox and the Stork, The” 
(La Fontaine), 

380- 81 

France, 146, 147, 150, 151, 
239, 240,241 
Fronde in, 133, 315 
1848 elections in, 242 
July Revolution in, 154 
Revolution in, 292,349, 
369,380,399 
Rothschild and, 174, 
262,283,340-41 
Washington and, 154 
Francesco, Grete de, 90, 
220-22,225 
Francis I, King, 311,340 
Francis II, King, 277 
Franklin, Benjamin, 220 
Frazer, Jamies George, 

203 

Frederick II “the Great,” 
King, 374 

Frederick William IV, 
King, 19-20, 84, 85 



freedom, 82, 167, 258, 262 
of expression, 321 
free lunch, 333-46 
Freud, Sigmund, 272,298, 
353, 383 

Frick, Henry, 103 
friend{s): 

former, now enemies, 
109 

posing as, while work¬ 
ing as spy, 101-6 
scapegoating of, 205 
trusting of, 8-15 \ 
friendliness, with master, 
181 

friendship, dependence 
vs., 87 

Fronde, the, 133,315 
“Funeral of die Lioness, 
The” (La Fontaine), 
264-65 

Furey, Joe, 140-41 
Fushimiya, 343-44 
future, 241,295, 296 

gadfly, 324 

Gaetani, Cardinal (Boni¬ 
face VIII), 361-62 
Gainsborough, Thomas, 
278-79 

Galileo, 3-4,175,319, 398 
gaps, 228 
Garbo, Greta, 121 
garden of weeds, image of, 
408 

Geezil, Sam, 23-25, 27 
generosity, 333,334,344 
in disarming victim, 
89-94 

indiscriminate, 335 
of others, appealing to, 
98 

strategic, 341, 342 
Genghis Khan, 99 
“Gentle Art of Persuasion, 
The” (Aesop), 370 
Germany, 239,240,241 
attacks on London, 106 
Treaty of Versailles and, 
114 

gestures, as indication of 
weaknesses, 272 
Get others to do the work 
for you, but always 
take the credit (Law 
7), 56-61 


Ghiberti, Lorenzo, 67 
gifts, 92,334, 340,343, 
344 

to patrons, 288-89 
Gilbert, Marie (Lola Mon- 
tez), 55, 77-79, 235, 
390-91 

Giovane, Palma, 46 
Giovio, Paolo, 109 
giving before you take. 91, 
92,288,334 
Glass Menagerie, The 
(Williams), 355 
go {wei-rhi}, 363,423-24, 

426 

goal: 

concentration on, 175 
disguising of, 212 
stopping after reaching, 
410-18 

“God and Abraham” {Ike 
Subtle Ruse: The Book 
of Ambit Wisdom and 
Guile |, 73-74 
gods, Greek, 241,243 
gods on Mount Olympus, 
image of, 243 
Godunov, Boris, 407 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang 
von, xix, 173, 222, 
374 

Golden Bough, The (Frazer), 
203 

Golden Dream, The; Seekers 
of El Dorado (Chap¬ 
man), 138-40 
Goldwyn, Samuel, 32 
Gonzaga, Gianfrancesco, 
150, 151 

goodwill gestures, 373 
“Goose and the Horse, 
The” (fable), 172-73 
Gordian knot, 351 
Gordon-Gordon, John, 
Lord (John Crown- 
ingsfield), 92 

Go-Saiin, Emperor, 306-7 
Gossaert, Jan, 47 
Goujian, King, 168 
Gould, Jay, 28-29,91-92 
governing, flexibility in, 

427 

Gracian, Baltasar, xxii, 19, 
72,314,378 
on absence and pres¬ 
ence, 121 


on being first, 348 
on being kinglike, 289 
on being seen, 49 
on committing to oth¬ 
ers, 151,155 
on concealing abilities, 
249 

on concealing mistakes, 
205 

on contempt, 308 
on disagreement with 
the many, 318 
on doing things yourself 
vs. using third par¬ 
ties, 213 

on envy, 408, 409, 409 
on fear of failure, 230 
on finding the thumb¬ 
screw, 281 

on intensity and exten¬ 
sity, 176 

on letting things be, 305 
on misfortunes of oth¬ 
ers, 81 

on mystery, 54 
on others’ dependence, 
88 

on outshining the mas¬ 
ter, 7 

on role-playing, 198 
on self-respect, 283 
on stepping into a great 
man’s shoes, 356 
on using enemies, 15 
on using others’ knowl¬ 
edge, 60 

on using stupidity, 161 
Graham, James, 220-22 
grandeur, 338 
Grant, Ulysses S., 366 
gratitude of others, appeal¬ 
ing to, 95-100 
great men, stepping into 
shoes of, 347-57 
Greece, 241, 318,319,350, 
351, 381,420, 428 
greed, 334,337,346 
“Greedy Man and the En¬ 
vious Man, The” 
(Jewish parable), 

401 

Greek sea-god Proteus, 
image of, 198 
Greeley, Horace, 157 
Gross, George, 24-25 
Gugsa, Ras, 328-29 



Guicciardini, Francesco, 
321 

guilt, exteriorizing of, 
203-4 

Guise family, 214 

half a heart, going hallway 
with, 228 

Halliwell, Kenneth, 401-2, 
408 

hallucinatory effect, 379 
Hamlet (Shakespeare), 54, 
353 

Han Dynasty, 10,183, 201 
Han-fei-tzu, 36, 58, 94, 

128, 131, 344, 375, 
396, 423 

Han Kao-tsu (Liu Pang}, 
108-10 

Hannibal, ,53-54 
Hanno the elephant, 232 
happy people, association 
with, 76, 80 

“Hare and the Tree, The” 
(Han-fei-tzu), 423 
Harpending, Asbury, 
157-58,1 59 
Hartzell, Oscar, 268 
Ha Tae-hung, 230-32 
hawk, image of, 299 
Heald, George Trafford, 78 
hearts and minds of oth¬ 
ers, working on, 

367- 75 

Hechigwan, Sakamotoya, 
313 

Hechigwan, Yamashina, 
387-88 

Heihachiro, Togo, 65 
Helen of Troy, 92-93 
help, asking for, 95-100 
Henri II, King, 9, 277,278, 
311-12 

Henry VIII, King, 303-4, 
393-94 
Hercules, 352 
Herodotus, 72-73 , 238, 
285-87, 341-43, 

368- 69, 428 

hesitation, boldness com¬ 
pared with, 228-29 
Heth, Joice, 46 
Hibbert, Christopher, 382 
Hideyoshi, Emperor, 5, 
210, 246,296, 313, 
416 


Hiero, King, 13 
“Hippocleides at Sicyon” 
(Herodotus), 285-87 
Hispanic Monarchy, The 
(Campanella), 320 
Histories, The (Herodotus), 
72-73,285-87 , 
341-43, 368-69 
Hitler, Adolf, 165, 166 
Holbein, Hans, 394 
Holland, 99 

Hollywood (Kanin), 273-74 
Hollywood, House Un- 
American Activities 
Committee and, 
86-87, 165-67, 
197-98, 322-23 
honesty, xviii, 20-21, 22, 
183 

selective, in disarming 
victim, 89-94 
honeyed bear trap, image 
of, 67 

honor, using absence to 
increase, 115—22 
Hoover, Herbert, 197 
Hoover, J. Edgar, 87 
hopelessly insecure man, 
dealing with, 138 
horns of the bull, image 
of, 261 

Houdini, Harry, 197, 
247-50, 252, 298, 
330 

House of Medici, The: Its Rise 
and Fall (Hibbert), 
382 

House Un-American Ac¬ 
tivities Committee, 
86-87, 165-67, 
197-98, 322-23 
Howe, Louis, 204 
“How to Broadcast News” 

(The Subtle Ruse: The 
Book of Arabic Wisdom 
and Guile), 208-9 
Hsiang Yu, 108-10 
Hsien, Duke, 94 
Hsing, 153 
Huan, 153 
Hugo, Victor, 374 
Huguenots, 214,275 
Huh Saeng, 230-32 
Huizinga, Johan, 311-12 
Hull, Pat, 78 
Hume, David, 266 


Humphrey, Hubert, 149 
Hundred Days, the, 197 
Hungary, 297 
hunter, image of, 144 
Huntington, Arabella, 
278-79 

Huntington, Collis P., 278 
hurrying, 291, 296, 

297-98 

Hyperbolus, 360 

Icarus falling from the sky, 
image of, 417 
ideas, unconventional, 
317-24 

identity, new, 191-99 
Ieyasu, Tokugawa, Em¬ 
peror, 99, 246, 266, 
296 

ignoring things you cannot 
have, 300-308 
illusions, 251 
images, 309,313,314-16, 
374 

in creating cult, 217-18 
symbols and, 314-15 
impatience, 296 
Inalchik, 139 
Incas, 59,238,239,335, 
359-60,365 

incense-smelling competi¬ 
tion, 344-45 

income, disguising source 
of, 218 

independence, 82,85, 88, 
145,154, 155, 175 
reputation for, 148 
Indiana (Sand), 194 
“Indian Bird, The” (Shah), 
210-11 
Indian fables: 

“The Ass and the Gar¬ 
dener,” 302 
“The Kites, the Crows, 
and the Fox,” 150-51 
“The Merchant and His 
Friend,” 377-79 
“The Wasp and the 
Prince,” 45 

Infection: avoid the un¬ 
happy and unlucky 
(Law 10), 76-81 
inferiority, feelings of, 

405 

information: 

fake, giving of, 106 



information (cont.) 
gathering of, 101, 106, 
143 

isolation and, 130 
infuriating enemies with 
the mirror effect, 
376-91 

innocence, xvc 
Innocent, Pope, 382 
innocent goat, image of, 
205 

innovation, 392,398,399 
Inquisition, 219, 220, 
319-20, 322 

insecurity, 55,138,141,143 
arrogance and, 287 
as thumbscrew, 271 
instincts, 143 
insulting others, 142, 143, 
159, 189 
intelligence: 

downplaying of, 156-62 
showing of, 161 
intentions, concealment 
of, 16-30 

cat’s-paw and, 209, 212 
intimacy, with master, 181 
Isaacson, Walter, 33 
Isabella, Queen, 286, 303 
Isabey, Jean-Baptiste, 
184-85 

Iskandar, Kai Ka’us ibn, 79 
isolation, 136,364-65 
danger of, 130-36 
of enemies, 358, 

363-64,366 
Israelis, 73 

Italy, 150, 151, 152, 320 
condottieri in, 83, 108-10 
Inquisition in, 219, 220, 
319-20 

Romagna, 202-3 
Ivan IV “the Terrible,” 
Czar, 230,231, 233, 
235,384-86, 407 
withdrawal of, 255-56, 
258,261 

Jackson, Stonewall, 127 
Jacobins, 292,293,380 
Jami, Mulla, 119 
Janin, Louis, 158 
Janus, xx 
Japan: 

China invaded by, 14, 
112, 208-9,422 


foreign cultures and, 
168, 428 
Holland and, 99 
incense-smelling com¬ 
petition in, 344-45 
Portugal and, 99 
Russia and, 65-66 
Japanese Art of War, The 
(Cleary), 25 
Japanese tea ceremony 
(Cha-no-yu), 5, 209, 
210,246,306, 313, 
326, 343,344,388 
Javiac, Guillelma de, 
116-17 

jaws of ingratitude, image 
of, 15 

Jehu, King, 23-24 
Jesus Christ, 169, 220, 
323,387, 393 , 394 
Jewish parable, 401 
Jews, 322, 393 
Joao II, King, 285 
Johnson, Andrew, 366 
Johnson, Lyndon B., 324 
Johnson, Samuel, 133 
Joke, The (Kundera), 168 
jokes, about appear ances 
or tastes, 181, 185, 
186, 189 

Jones, Ernest, 352-53 
Joseph, and coat of many 
colors, 406 

Joseph II, King, 356-57 
Julius II, Pope, 86, 151, 
175, 406, 407 ,409 
Julius Caesar (Shake¬ 
speare), 79, 299 
July Revolution, 154 
Jupiter, moons of, 3-4 
justice, appeals to, 96-97 
Just So Stories (Kipling), 

84 

Kanin, Garson, 273-74 
Kao Tsung, 110 
Kautilya, xix, 103, 108, 
110 , 211 

Kean, Charles John, 55 
Keep others in suspended 
terror: cultivate an 
air of unpredictabil¬ 
ity (Law 17), 123-29 
Keep your hands clean 
(Law 26), 200-214 
Kenko, 302-3, 329, 414 


Kennedy, John E, 305, 
353 

Ketel, Comelis, 46 
keyhole, image of, 374 
Khaldun, ibn, 334-35 
Khan, Genghis, 139-40 
Khrushchev, Nikita, 73 
Kierkegaard, Seren, 30, 
401, 403, 406 
kindness, selective, 91, 93 
kinds of people, 137-44 
king, 363, 426 
acting like, 282-90 
hostility toward, 352 
“King, the Sufi, and the 
Surgeon, The” 
(Shah), 238-39 
Kipling, Rudyaxd, 84 
Kissinger (Isaacson), 33 
Kissinger, Henry: 
boldness of, 234 
China and, 61, 149 
Humphrey and, 149 
indispensability of, 87 
in Israeli negotiations, 
73 

kidnapping attempt 
and, 13 

Lord’s report and, 
32-33 

Nixon and, 61, 87, 
148-49,259,306 
options controlled by, 
259 

Pentagon Papers and, 
306 

reputation of, 41-42 
smoke screen and, 28 
Soviet Union and, 149 
“Kites, the Crows, and the 
Fox, The” (Indian 
fable), 150-51 
Kleppini, 248-50,330 
knowledge: 

from the past, using, 
59-60 

specialized, having ap¬ 
pearance of, 86 
Know who you’re dealing 
with-do not offend 
the wrong person 
(Law 19), 137-44 
Roller, General, 64 
Kriloff, Ivan, 179-80, 
272-73, 306 
Kundera, Milan, 168 



Kurbski, Andrey, 255 

La Bruyere, Jean de, 100, 
126, 182 

Lacan, Jacques, 298 
La Fontaine, Jean de, fa¬ 
bles of: 

“The Animals Stricken 
with the Plague,” 
38-40 

“The Camel and the 
Floating Sticks,” 116 
“The Dog with the 
Cropped Ears,” 
420-21 

“A Fool and a Wise 
Man *209-10 
“The Fox and the 
Grapes,” 301 
“The Fox and the 
Stork *.380-81 
“The Funeral of the Li¬ 
oness,” 264-65 
“The Monkey and the 
Cat,” 206-7 
“The Two Adventur¬ 
ers,” 228-29 
language, changing to fit 
different people, 180 
La Rochefoucauld, 

Francois de, 18,257, 
402 

on absence, 117 
spying tip from, 104 
Lauzun, Due de, 48 
Law 1: Never outshine the 
master, 1-7 
Law 2: Never put too 

much trust in friends, 
learn how to use en¬ 
emies, 8-15 

l aw 3; Conceal your in¬ 
tentions, 16-30 
Law 4: Always say less 
than necessary, 

31-36 

Law 5; So much depends 
on reputation-guard 
it with your life, 
37-43 

Law 6: Court attention at 
all cost, 44-55 
Law 7; Get others to do 
the work for you, but 
always take the 
credit, 56-61 


Law 8: Make other people 
come to you-use 
bait if necessary, 
62-68 

Law 9: Win through your 
actions, never 
through argument, 
69-75 

Law 10: Infection: avoid 
the unhappy and un¬ 
lucky, 76-81 
Law 11: Learn to keep 

people dependent on 
you, 82-88 

Law 12: Use selective hon¬ 
esty and generosity 
to disarm your vic¬ 
tim, 89-94 

Law 13: When asking for 
help, appeal to peo¬ 
ple’s self-interest, 
never to their mercy 
or gratitude, 95-100 
Law 14: Pose as a friend, 
work as a spy, 101-6 
Law 15: Crush your 
enemy totally, 

107-14 

Law 16: Use absence to in¬ 
crease respect and 
honor, 115-22 
Law 17: Keep others in 
suspended terror: 
cultivate an air of un¬ 
predictability, 

123-29 

Law 18: Do not build 
fortresses to protect 
yourself-isolation is 
dangerous, 130-36 
Law 19: Know who you’re 
dealing with—do not 
offend the wrong 
person, 137-44 
Law 20: Do not commit to 
anyone, 145-55 
Law 21: Play a sucker to 
catch a sucker-seem 
dumber than your 
mark, 156-62 
Law 22: Use the surrender 
tactic: transform 
weakness into 
power, 163-70 
Law 23: Concentrate your 
forces, 171-77 


Law 24: Play the perfect 
courtier, 178-90 
Law 25: Re-create your¬ 
self, 191-99 

Law 26: Keep your hands 
clean, 200-214 
Law 27: Play on people’s 
need to believe to 
create a cultlike fol¬ 
lowing, 215-26 
Law 28: Enter action with 
boldness, 227-35 
Law 29: Plan all the way 
to the end, 236-44 
Law 30: Make your ac¬ 
complishments seem 
effortless, 245-53 
Law 31: Control die op¬ 
tions: get others to 
play with the cards 
you deal, 254-62 
Law 32: Play to people’s 
fantasies, 263-70 
Law 33: Discover each 
man’s thumbscrew, 
271-81 

Law 34: Be royal in your 
own fashion: act like 
a king to be treated 
like one, 282-90 
Law 35: Master the art of 
liming, 291-99 
Law 36: Disdain things 
you cannot have: ig¬ 
noring them is the 
best revenge, 
300-308 

Law 37: Create com¬ 
pelling spectacles, 
309-16 

Law 38: Think as you like 
but behave like oth¬ 
ers, 317-24 

Law 39: Stir up waters to 
catch fish, 325-32 
Law 40: Despise the free 
lunch, 333-46 
Law 41: Avoid stopping 
into a great man’s 
shoes, 347-57 
Law 42: Strike the shep¬ 
herd and the sheep 
will scatter, 358-66 
Law 43: Work on the 

hearts and minds of 
others, 367-75 



Law 44: Disarm and infu 
riate with the mirror 
effect, 376-91 
Law 45: Preach the need 
for change, but never 
reform too much at 
once, 392-99 
Law 46: Never appear too 
perfect, 400-409 
Law 47: Do not go past 
the mark you aimed 
for: in victory, learn 
when to stop, 410-18 
Law 48: Assume formless¬ 
ness, 419-30 

I^awrence, T. E., 372, 373, 
425-26 

Lawrence, Thomas, 188 
Lawson, John, 86-87 
Lazar, Irving, 273-74 
Learn to keep people de¬ 
pendent on you 
(Law 11), 82-88 
leaving things alone, 300 
Lenclos, Anne de (Ninon 
de Lenclos), 17-18, 
29,119, 233-34, 
256-58 

system of, 257-58 
Leo X, Pope, 46 ,232 
Leonardo da Vinci, 33, 

151, 177, 342 
“The Chestnut and the 
Fig Tree,” 164 
“The Nut and the Cam¬ 
panile,” 77 

“Liar, The” (Armenian 
folktale), 256-57 
Liberius, Pope, 394 
Lieh Tzu, 294-95 
lies, 321 

as bodyguard, 106 
boldness and, 228 
verbal argument and, 

74 

Life, Letters, and Epicurean 
Philosophy of Ninon de 
Lenclos (Lenclos), 
233-34 

Life of Alexander the Great, 
The (Plutarch), 

371-72 

Life of Antony (Plutarch), 
310-11 

Life of Julius Caesar, The 
(Plutarch), 278-79 


Life of Pericles, The 

(Plutarch), 349-50 
Life of Sertorius (Plutarch), 
292-94 

Life ofThemistocles, The 
(Plutarch), 362 
limelight, image of, 49 
Lincoln, Abraham, 12, 13, 
366 

character of, 196-97, 

270 

Lind, Jenny, 42 
Lin Piao, 396 
“Lion, the Chamois, and 
the Fox, The” 
(Kriloff), 272-73 
lion and the hare, image 
of, 234 

lions circle the hesitant 
prey, 228 

Lippi, Fra Filippo, 187, 314 
Liszt, Franz, 55, 194 
Lithuania, 2 55 
Little, Brown Book of Anec¬ 
dotes, The (Fadiman, 
ed.), 32, 165, 255, 
258, 301 
Liu, King, 11 
Liu Pang (Han Kao-tsu), 
108-10 

Lives of the Artists (Vasari), 
350-51 

Loller, Herman, 275-77 
London, Nazi attacks on, 
106 

Long March, 112,208, 

422 

longtime, 295,296-97 
Lorca, Ramiro de, 109 
Lord, Winston, 32-33 
Lorris, Guillaume de, 345 
Louis, Joe, 68 
Louis XI, King, 85-86 
Louis XII, King, 150-51 
Louis XIII, King, 160, 176, 
273-75 

Louis XIV (Bertrand), 33 
Louis XIV, King, 9, 180, 
184, 242,305, 348, 
349, 353, 374 
as center of activity, 
132-33, 134 
Due de Lauzim and, 48 
Fouquet and, 2-3, 5 
generosity of, 342-43 
Mancini and, 383-84 


as Sun King, 313, 314, 
315, 348, 349, 384 
taciturnity of, 33-34, 33 
Louis XV, King, 348-50, 
355, 368, 413-14 
Louis XVI, King, 190, 

224,279, 280,292, 
294, 349,368, 369, 
399, 429 

Louis XVIII, King, 294, 
379,426 

Louis-Philippe, King, 
283-84, 287,426 
love, xx 

other people’s, vs. their 
fear, 87 

Luce, Henry, 188-89 
Lucca, 153 
luck, 415-16 

Ludwig, King, 55, 77-78, 
390-91 

Ludwig Wittgenstein: A 
Memoir (Malcolm), 
383 

Lustig, Victor, 91,234, 

288 

air of mystery surround¬ 
ing, 52 

Capone and, 90-91 
Eiffel Tower scheme of, 
94,229-30 
I jailer and, 275-77 
money-copying ma¬ 
chine of, 74-75, 
276-77 

Mac Arthur, Douglas, 354 
Macbeth (Shakespeare), 55 
McClellan, George, 127, 
157 

Machiavelli, Niccolo, xvii, 
xx, xxiii, 11, 87, 109, 
136, 179, 202, 298, 
320, 350, 366, 415, 
418 

on annihilating the 
enemy, 113 
on choice, 261 
on Cosimo de’ Medici, 
404 

on deception, 220 
on dependence, 85 
on fortresses, 133, 136 
on going beyond the 
mark, 417 

on hiding the truth, 321 


444 INDEX 



on impetuousness vs. 

caution, 234 
on necessity, 349 
on the overreaching 
general, 412-13 
on reform, 396,397, 

399 

on spectacle, 316 
Voltaire on, 322 
magicians, 298 
magnet, image of, 225 
magnetism, animal, 
223-24 

Mahabharata, 11-12 
Make other people come 
to you -use bait if 
necessary (Law 8), 
62-68 

Make your accomplish¬ 
ments seem effortless 
(Law 30), 245-53 
Malcolm, Norman, 383 
Mamugna (11 Bragadino), 
264-66, 267,270 
“Man and His Shadow, 
The” (Kriioff), 306 
Manchuria, 422-23 
Martcini, Baroness, 

382-83 

Mancini, Marie, 383-84 
Manfredi, Astorre, Prince, 
5 

manipulation, 66 
Mansart, Jules, 184 
Mantua, 150, 151, 152 
Mantua, Duke of, 264, 
266,288-89, 339-40 
“Man Who Loved Money 
Better Than Life, 
The” (Chinese fable), 
337-38 

Mao Tse-tung, 14, 53, 113, 
176, 197,353, 424, 
430 

father of, 354-55 
isolation of enemies by, 
364 

Lin Piao and, 396 
Nationalists and, 112, 
208-9,422-23,424, 
430 

past and, 394-96 
public emotions and, 
373 

scapegoats and, 204 
wei-cht and, 424,426 


Marconi, Gughelmo, 57 
Maria, Filippo, 126-27 
Maria Theresa, Empress, 
356-57 

MaiieAntoinette, 224, 
368-69,399, 429 
Marie de’ Medicis, 273-74 
maritime warfare, 425 
Marlborough, Duchess of, 
337-38 

Marlborough, Duke of, 21, 
337-38 
Marianos, 322 
martial arts, 420 
martyrdom, 170, 204, 321 
Mary Queen of Scots, 147 
Masamune, Date, 246-47 
345 

Masayoshi, Hotta, 168 
Masque of tke Red Death, 

The (Poe), 131-33 
masquerading as a swine 
to kill the tiger, 160 
Massacre of St 

Bartholomew's Eve, 
214 

Massagetai, 411-12 
m aster (s): 

friendliness with, 181 
making a gift of your 
talent to, 187 
outshining of, 1-7 
proving dedication to, 
with excess of effort, 
416-17 

two, satisfying of, 185 
Master the art of timing 
(Law 35), 291-99 
Mata Hari, 50-51,52,55, 
268 

Matsumoto, Michihiro, 
336 

Maurer, Christopher, 348 
Mayer, Louis B., 32 
Mazarin, Jules, 2,383 
Medea, 118-19 
Medici, Cosimo I de’, 3, 4, 
134-35 

Medici, Cosimo II de', 4 
Medici, Cosimo de’ (the 
Elder), 341, 398, 
403-4,405,408 
Medici, Giovanni de’, 403 
Medici, Lorenzo de\ 
341-42 

Pope Innocent and, 382 


Medici family, 3-4,175, 
340,341, 398,403-4 
Medicis, Catherine de’, 
214,277-78 

Medicis, Marie de\ 273-74 
Medusa, 377 
Meegeren, Han van, 
268-69 

meetings, territory and, 66 
Mehmed the Conqueror, 
297 

Mellon, Andrew, 28,102 
Melos, 164-65,167 
Melville, Herman, 408 
Memoirs (Casanova), 192 
Menelik II, King, 288 
Menghuo, King, 370-71 
Meninas, Las (Velazquez), 
196 

mercenary soldiers (condot- 
tien), 83, 108-10 
“Merchant and His 

Friend, The” (Indian 
fable), 377-79 
Mercury, 425 
image of, 430 
mercy of others, appealing 
to, 95-100 
mermaid, 46 
Mesmer, Franz, 223-25 
Metamorphoses (Ovid), 
402-4 

metaphors, 387 
Mettemich, Klemens von, 
64, 380 
Mexico, 301-2 
Michael III, Emperor, 
9-10, 13 

Michelangelo, 71-72,86, 
87,175,251, 342, 
406-8,409 
Michelozzo, 404 
Milan, 150, 151,152,219 
mimicry, 377,378,379 
minds and hearts of oth¬ 
ers, working on, 
367-75 

mine foil of diamonds and 
rubies, image of, 43 
Minerva, 402-4 
mirrored situations, dan¬ 
ger of, 390-91 
mirror effect, 376-91 
Mirror for Princes, A (Iskan- 
dar), 79 

“Miser, The” (Aesop), 335 



misfortune, 76, 81 
mistakes: 

audacity and, 227 
concealing of, by use of 
scapegoat, 201-5, 

214 

fixing of, 800, 306 
indifference to, 307 
taking blame for, 214 
Mithras, 394 
Mi Tzu-hsia, 41 
Moctezuma, King, 365 
MoliSre, 2,18,257 
money, 333-46 
circulation of, 340 
emotions and, 342-43, 
344 

Mongols, 99 
“Monkey and the Cat, 
The” (La Fontaine), 
206-7 

“Monkey and the Peas, 
The” (Tolstoy), 304 
“Monkey and the Wasp, 
The” (Birch), 328 
monopolies, 88,259 
Montaigne, 78 ,243 
Montez, Lola, 55, 77-79, 
235,390-91 
moon, image of, 269 
Moon Doctor of Berlin 
(Dr, Weisleder), 
310-11,313 
moral effect, of mirror, 
378-79 

Morgan, J. Pierpont, 57, 
88, 175, 258 
Morphy, Paul, 352-53 
Moses, 112, 352 
Pharaoh and, 338-40 
Mountain Doctor, the 
(Michael Schup- 
pach), 221-23 
Mrazek, James, 424 
Mr. Suspicion, dealing 
with, 138 

Mucianus, Publius Crassus 
Dives, 70 

Muhammad, Shah of 
Khwarezm, 139-40 
Mulk, Nizam al-, 338-40 
Mugaddimah, The 

(Khaldun), 334-35 
Musashi, Miyamoto, 78, 
379 

Musset, Alfred de, 194 


Mussolini, Benito, 87 
mystery, 50,52-53,54, 

55,212,252 

naivete, xviii-xix 
Napoleon I, Emperor, 
xviii, 13,22, 68, VO, 
112, 174-75, 197, 

251,283, 284, 
293-94,295,356, 
371, 374,399,415, 
429 

boar hunt and, 189-90 
boldness of, 233 
character of, 81 
Fouche spied on by, 
379-80 

imprisonment and es¬ 
cape from Elba, 
63-64,65,66, 184, 
294,379 

and power of absence, 
120 

Talleyrand and Fouche’s 
conspiracy against, 
13,293-94,326-27, 
330 

at Waterloo, 63,294, 
327 

Napoleon III, Emperor, 
174,240,356,374 
Narcissus effect, 378 
Narvaez, Ramon Maria, 
111 

National Gallery of Art 
(Washington, D.C.), 
28,102 

nature, 222-23,247,250 
Nazis, 106,315 
negotiation, 112 
boldness in, 233-34 
territory and, 66 
Neoptolemus, 93 
Neue Zurcher Zettung 
(Rischke), 393-94 
neutralizing eff ect, of mir¬ 
ror, 377-78 

Never appear too perfect 
(Law 46), 400-409 
Never outshine the master 
(Law 1), 1-7 

Never put too much trust 
in friends, learn how 
to use enemies (law 
2), 8-15 

Newton, Isaac, 60 


New York Times, 306 
Ney, Marshal, 63 
Nicholas I, Czar, 35 
Nicholas II, Czar, 364 
Nicias, 360 

Nietzsche, Friedrich, xviii, 
xxi, 40 

on belief in oneself, 287 
on founding a religion, 
220 

system of, 257-58 
Nixon, Richard: 

China visit of, 61 
Kissinger and, 61, 87, 
148-49,259,306 
Pentagon Papers and, 
306 

noble gesture, 28 
Nobunaga, Oda, 416 
nonchalance, 180 
Norfleet, J. Frank, 140-41 
notice, 180 
notoriety, 45 
“Nut and the Campanile, 
The” (Leonardo), 77 

oak tree, image of, 169 
Obolensky, Ivan, 231 
Odysseus, xx, 93,241 
Oedipus, 203 
offending the wrong per¬ 
son, 137-44 

old people vs. young, 353, 
357 

Old Testament, 23-24 
On War (Clausewitz), 174 
opossum, image of, 161 
opponents: 

typology o£ 138-39 
see also enemies 
options, controlling of, 
254-62 

forms of, 259-61 
Oracle at Delphi, image 
of, 36 

orchestration of events, 197 
originality, 317 
Orleans, Duke of, 260 
Orton, Joe, 401-2,408 
ostentation, avoiding, 
179-80 
ostraka, 359 
other people: 

appealing to self-interest 
of, 95-100,372, 
373-74 



becoming focal point of 
their need to believe, 
215-26 

behaving like, while 
thinking as you like, 
317-24 

commitment to, 145-55 
discovering thumb¬ 
screws of, 271-81 
insulting, 142,143, 159, 
189 

keeping them depen¬ 
dent on you, 82-88 
keeping them in sus¬ 
pended terror, 
123-29 

making them come to 
you, 62-68 
playing to their fan¬ 
tasies, 263-70 
types of, 137-44 
unhappy and unlucky, 
avoidance of, 76-81 
using work of, 56-61 
working on hearts and 
minds of, 367-75 
overacting, 198 
overstepping your bounds, 
186 

Ovid, 319, 402-4 
“Owl Who Was God, 

The” (Thurber), 
217-19 

Pacific Ocean, discovery 
of, 238,239 
Panama, 237 
Panchatantra, tale from, 
207-8 

parables, see fables and 
folktales 

Parc aux Cerfe, 348, 414 
parents, stepping into 
shoes of, 347-57 
Paris, liberation of, 315 
past: 

reinterpretation of, 397 
support for values of, 
397-98 

using knowledge from, 
59-60 

patience, xxi, 291, 295, 

298 

patrons, 86,175,251, 342 
Aretino and, 338-40 
gifts to, 288-89 


patterns, 28,126,128,129, 
415, 416 

Pausanias, 318-19,323 
pawns, 367, 373 
paying full price, 333,334, 
344, 346 

paying your own way, 

333,346 

pearls before swine, laying 
of, 321,323 

“Peasant and the Apple 
Tree, The” (Aesop), 
96 

Pedrarias (Pedro Arias 
DSvila}, 238, 239 
Peloponnesian War, 97, 
164, 241 

Peloponnesian War, The 
(Thucydides), 98 
Pentagon Papers, 306 
people, see other people 
perfection, appearance of, 
400-409 
Pergamus, 70 
Pericles, 349-50, 354, 
359-60, 416 
Perseus, 377,390 
Pershing, John J., 301,302 
Persia, 148, 318-19,351, 
359,381,382, 
411-12, 420,428 
personality, 195 
perspective: 

anger and, 329-30 
isolation and, 136 
per suasion, 73 

working on the hearts 
and minds of others, 
367-75 

Peru, 335, 359-60 
Perugino, Pietro, 350-51 
Peter II, Emperor, 427 
Petit Trianon, 368 
Petrucci, Pandolfo, 11 
pettiness, 338 
Philip, Kang of Macedo¬ 
nia, 350-52,416 
Philip II, King of Spain, 
353 

Philippines, 354 
philosopher’s stone, 219, 
220 

Phoenicia, 331 
Picasso, Pablo, 48-49, 
127-28, 149,355 
pickpockets, 66 


Pisa, 342 
Pistoia, 153 
Pizarro, Francisco, 59, 
238,335-36, 

359-60 ,365 
Pizarro, Gonzalo, 336 
placating others, 188 
plain, unassuming, and 
often unintelligent 
man, dealing with, 
138-39 

Han all the way to the end 
(Law 29}, 236-44 
Planck, Max, 398 
planning, 212, 419 
to the end, 236-44 
flexibility in, 244 
and learning when to 
stop, 410-18 
Play a sucker to catch a 
sucker-seem 
dumber than your 
mark (Law 21), 
156-62 

Play on people’s need to 
believe to create a 
culttike following 
(Law 27), 215-26 
Play the perfect courtier 
(Law 24), 178-90 
Play to people’s fantasies 
(Law 32), 263-70 
pleasure, being a source 
of, 182 

Plutarch, 13, 60, 278-79, 
292-94, 310-11, 
349-50, 362, 371-72, 
405 

Pocket Mirror for Heroes, A 
(Gracidn), 348 
Pbe, Edgar- Allan, 131-33, 
381 

Poggio, Stefano di, 96-97 
Poggio family, 96, 97 
Poland, 255 
polio vaccine, 322 
politeness, 180 
politics, abstraction in, 

425 

Pompadour, Madame de 
(Jeanne Poisson), 
348,413-14, 415 
Pompey, 192, 278-79 
pond of fish, image of, 331 
Pontormo, Jacopo da, 135, 
252 



Portugal, 99 

Pose as a friend, work as a 
spy (Law 14), 101-6 
potlatch feasts, 341 
“Power of a Lie, The” 
(Jewish folktale), 
223-24 

Power of the Charlatan, The 
(Francesco), 90, 
220-22 

praise, 405, 408 
Preach the need for 

change, but never re¬ 
form too much at 
once (Law 45), 
392-99 

predecessors, stepping 

into shoes of, 347-57 
predictability, 123, 125, 
129, 429 

Prescott, William H., 
359-60 

presence, 117, 119-20, 121, 
364 

boldness and, 228-29 
spectacles and, 309 
prey, hesitant, 228 
price, setting your own, 
289 

“Price of Envy, The” (Jew¬ 
ish folktale), 153-54 
Prince, The (Machiavelli), 
xxiii, 136, 202 
Problem of Paul Morphy, The 
(Jones), 352-53 
problems, petty, 300 
“Prodigy Ox, The” 
(Kenko), 302-3 
proportion, loss of, 135 
protection, 177, 421, 422 
fortresses for, 130-36 
Protestantism, 393-94, 

398 

Protestant Reformation, 
319 

Proteus, image of, 198 
proud and arrogant man, 
dealing with, 138 
Prussia, 160,239-41 
Psalmanazar, George, 
267-68 

Ptolemy XII, 206 
Ptolemy XIII, 206,207 
Ptolemy XIV, 207 
Punitive Expedition, 

301-3 


“Purloined Letter, The” 
(Poe), 381 

purpose, single-minded¬ 
ness of, 175, 177 
Pynchon, Thomas, 120 

queen, 426-27 

racehorse, image of, 252 
Raleigh, Walter, 34, 146, 
213, 319, 364, 406 
Ralston, William, 157, 158, 
159 

Raphael, 232 
Rasputin, 364 
reality(ies), 263 

oppressive, fantasies 
from, 266-69 
Rechberg, Otto von, 77 
Re-create yourself (Law 
25), 191-99 

red herrings, 17, 21,28, 30 
reform, 392-99 
Reformation, 319 
Reich, Wilhelm, 425 
religion, 215, 216,342 
borrowing forms of, 218 
reputation, 37-43 

for deception and dis¬ 
honesty, 30,42 
for independence, 148 
and keeping your hands 
clean, 200-214 
and scapegoat for tak¬ 
ing blame, 201-5, 

214 

respect, using absence to 
increase, 115-22 
Retz, Cardinal de, 34, 165, 
232, 242,260,406-7 
the Fronde and, 315 
revenge, of enemies, 111, 
114,261,366 
revolution, 397,398 
rhythms, 415,416 
Richelieu, Cardinal, 18, 
175-76,241,273-75 
plot against, 204 
rigidity, 429 

Rikyu, Sen no, 5-6, 209, 
210,246,247, 

387-88 

Rischke, Anne-Susanne, 
393-94 

rivals, see enemies 
river, image of, 345 


robber barons, 42, 66, 142 
Robert-Houdin, Jean-Eu¬ 
gene, 298 

Robespierre, Maximilien 
Francois-Marie 
Isidore de, 284, 
292-93,295 
Rockefeller, John D., 88, 
259,298 

Rockefeller, Nelson, 148 
Rodriguez, Joao, 428 
roles, 191, 195 
Romagna, 202-3 
romance, 263 
Romance of the Rose, The 
(Lorris), 345 
Roman empire, 172 
Rome, 150,152, 192, 393, 
397 

Faliscans and, 93 
Hannibal’s march on, 
53-54 

theater in, 192-93 
Rommel, Erwin, 41, 424 
Ronsard, Pierre de, 312 
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 28, 
197, 305,323 
dog of, 305-6 
Howe and, 204 
image of, 204, 284 
Rosenberg, Paul, 127-28 
Rothschild, James, 28, 

173, 174,262, 283, 
340-41,426 

Rothschild, Nathan, 157, 
159 

Rothschild family, 173-74 
Rouet, Louise de, 277 
routine, 126 
royalty, acting like, 

282-90 

Rubens, Peter Paul, 59 
Rubicon, 192, 198 
rudeness, 180 
ruling, formless style of, 
427 

Russia, 230, 255-56,327, 
427 

in war with lap an, 
65-66 

Ryleyev, Kondraty, 35 
Ryogaku, High Priest, 329 

Saadi, 247-48 
sacrifice, ritual, 203-4 
sadists, financial, 335, 338 



Sadler, A. L.» 246-47,373 , 
326-27 

Saint-Evremond, Seigneur 
de, 257 

Saint-Simon, Louis de 
Rouvroy, Due de, 

34, 132-33, 184 
Salinger, J, D., 120 
Salk Jonas, 322,323,398 
Samarkand, 139-40 
Sand, George (Aurore 
Dupin Dudevant), 
194-95, 196,306 
Sanemon, Kawachiya, 210 
San Lorenzo, 135 
Sansovino, Jacopo, 339 
Santa Maria del Fiore, 
66-67, 71 
sarcasm, 35-36 
Saturnalia, 393 
Sauves, Charlotte de 

Beaune Semblamjay 
de, 277 

saying less than necessary, 
31-36 

scandal, 45,48,49 
scapegoats, 201-5,214 
mistakes in using, 214 
scarcity, 120-21 
Schimmel, Solomon, 401 
Schleswig-Holstein, 239 
Schopenhauer, Arthur: 
on being cheated, 343 
on combatting and cor¬ 
recting others, 321 
on envy, 405 
on getting others to re¬ 
veal themselves, 104 
on intellect, 157-58, 174 
on a man’s handling of 
trifles, 277 

on politeness and rude¬ 
ness, 180 
on self-interest, 97 
on showing anger to¬ 
ward others, 327 
on showing disdain for 
others, 304 

Schiippach, Michael {the 
Mountain Doctor), 
221-23 
science, 398 
Scientific Theory and Reli¬ 
gion (Barnes), 422 
Scotland, 147 
seamless blend, 29 


Second Punic War, 53 
secret intelligence, 87 
Seducer’s Mirror, 378, 

382,384 

seduction, 18, 233, 364-65 
working on the hearts 
and minds of others, 
367-75 

seesaw, image of, 74 
Selassie, Haile, 25-27, 

288, 327-29 

Selected Fables (La Fontaine), 
see La Fontaine, Jean 
de, fables of 
self-consciousness, 196 
self-control, 152,153, 155, 
167, 182, 196,243, 
330 

hurrying and, 291 
self-creation, 191-99 
self-discipline, 337 
self-interest of others, ap¬ 
pealing to, 95-100, 
372,373-74 
self-observation, 181 
self-sacrifice, 373 
sensation and scandal, 45, 
48, 49 
senses, 314 

and creating cult, 

217-18 

serpent with a long mem¬ 
ory, dealing with, 

138 

Sertorius, 292-94 
Seven Pillars of Wisdom 
(Lawrence), 372 
Sevigne, Marquis de, 

17-18 

sexuality, 225, 268 
Seymour, Jane, 394 
Sforza, Lodovico, 150 
Shadow, 377-78 
Shah, Idries, 119, 210-11, 
238-39, 305, 

319-20,336-37 
Shakespeare, William, 54, 
55, 60, 79,135.299, 
353 

Shaw, George Bernard, 
301 

sheep’s skin, image of, 29 
shepherd, striking of, 
358-66 

Sherman, William T., 
260-61 


shield of Perseus, image 
of, 390 

Shigemune, Itakura, 
326-27 

Sho-o, Takeno, 387,388 
Shu Chan, 141 
Shuisky, Andrei, 231 
Shuisky family, 231 
Shu Kingdom, 38,370 
Sicily, 172,241-42,305, 
381,416 
Sicyon, 285-87 
Siena, patron saint of, 83 
sight, 314 
silence, 34-35,36 
Sima Yi, 38-39 
simplicity, in creating cult, 
217 

sincerity, 196 
false, 17,21-22,30 
selective, 89, 90-91 
single-mindedness, 175, 

177 

Sinigaglia, 108-10 
Sistine Chapel, 409 
Siu, R.G.H., 207-8, 
247-48, 295 
skills, 86, 184 
Slack John, 157-59, 

160-61 

smoke screens, 23,27,28, 
29,30, 36,129 
“Snake, the Farmer, and 
the Heron, The” 
(African folktale), 10 
sneak across the ocean in 
broad daylight, 25 
social circles, fantasy of 
adventure vs., 

267-68 

social movements, 295 
social skills, 134,184 
Societies of Harmony, 224 
Socrates, 381 
Sodermi, Piero, 71-72 
Sodoma, II, 46 
Soemon, Hoshino, 209-10 
solitude, 133 
solstice, 393 

So much depends on repu¬ 
tation-guard it with 
your life (Law 5), 
37-43 

sophistication, 160-61 
source of power, striking 
at, 358-66 



sour-grapes approach, 306 
Soviet Union, 149 
Spain, 146, 150, 275, 293, 
320,326,327 
Balboa and, 237-38 
Jews persecuted in, 322 
and search for El Do¬ 
rado, 237,238, 
335-37 

Sparta, 148, 164,318,319, 
381-82, 420-22 
war between Athens 
and, 421-22,427 
Spassky, Boris, 124-26 
spectacles, creation of, 
309-16 

Spencer, W. B., 140 
Spenser, Edmund, 146 
spirit of the times, 182, 

291,292,295 
going against, 317 
paying attention to, 399 
sprezzatura, 250-51 
spying, 143 

by others, on you, 106 
on others, 101-6 
squabbles, being drawn 
into, 150-54 
Stalin, Joseph, 73 
stars in the sky, image of, 6 
Stavisky, Serge, 260 
Stendhal, 28,149 
stepping into a great man’s 
shoes, 347—57 
Stetten, Baron von, 104 
Stevenson, Robert Louis, 
322 

Stir up waters to catch fish 
(Law 39), 325-32 
stopping, after victory, 
410-18 

strategy, military, 425-26 
Strategy of the Crown, 

287 

Streetcar Named Desire, A 
(Williams), 355 
Strike the shepherd and 
the sheep will scatter 
(Law 42), 358-66 
style, changing to fit differ¬ 
ent people, 180 
Subtle Ruse, The: The Book 
of Arabic Wisdom and 
Guile. 

“God and Abraham,” 
73-74 


“How to Broadcast 
News ” 208-9 
“The Sultan and tire 
Vizier,” 70-71 
success, 414-15, 416 
suckers: 

playing dumber than, 
156-62 

typology of, 138-39 
see also con artists 
Sufi proverb, 12 
“Sultan and the Vizier, 
The” {The Subtle 
Ruse: The Book of Ara¬ 
bic Wisdom and 
Guile), 70-77 
Sumatra, 352 
sun, image of, 120 
Sung, Emperor, 10-12 
SungYi, 108 
Sun Pin, 330,332 
Sun-tzu, 105, 111, 112, 172, 
329,330, 331,377, 
389,430 

surrender, 163-70 
suspense, 123-29, 298 
suspicious man, dealing 
with, 138 

Suzutomo, Akimoto, 344 
symbols, 73,309, 313-16, 
323,373, 387 
images and, 314-15 
Syracuse, 305 

Tacitus, 12 

Tadakatsu, Sakai, 246-47 
T’ai Tsung, Emperor, 110 
talent, 184 

making a gift of, 187 
and outshining master, 
1-7 

Tales of the Dervishes (Shah), 
210-11, 319-20 
Talleyrand Perigord, 

Charles-Maurice de, 

13,22,28,293-94, 

379 

boar hunt and, 189-90 
in conspiracy against 
Napoleon, 13, 
293-94,326-27, 

330 

conversational skills of, 
103-4 

dishonest reputation of, 
94 


“effortless” accomplish¬ 
ments of, 251 
Fouche and, 13, 

293-94, 326, 327 
information-gathering 
of, 103-4 

Isabey and, 184-85 
July Revolution and, 

154 

and Napoleon’s escape 
from Elba, 63, 64, 65 
positive qualities of, 81 
social connections of, 
134 

Tannyu, Kano, 210, 
246-47 

tantrums, 327, 329, 331 
taste, jokes about, 181, 

186,189 
tea bowl, 344 
tea ceremony (Cha-no-yu), 
5,209,210,246, 

306, 313, 326, 343, 
344, 388 

Teacher’s Mirror, 379 
teacup, 343-44 
Temple of Health, 220-22 
tempo, 415 

territory, for meetings, 66 
Tesla, Nikola, 42-43,48, 
57-58,59, 175 
Testi, Fulvio, 186 
theater, theatricality, 193, 
199,270 

in creating cult, 218 
timing and, 197 
Themistocles, 359, 362 
Theoctistus, 9 
Theodora, Empress, 9 
thicket of shrubs, image of, 
755 

Thiers, Louis-Adolphe, 242 
Think as you like but be¬ 
have like others 
(Law 38), 317-24 
third eye of the spy, image 
of, 105 

“Thirty-Six Strategies, 
The” {TheJapanese 
Art of War), 25 
Thoreau, Henry David, 
408 

Thucydides, 98, 319 
Thumb, Tom, 46, 270 
thumbscrew, image of, 

280 



thumbscrews, 271-81 
Thunder in die Sky (Cleary, 
tram), 138 

Thurber, James, 217-19 
Tkurber CarnivalThe 
(Thurber), 217-19 
Thumeisser, Leonhard, 267 
Tiffany, Charles. 157, 158, 
159 
time, 295 
end, 296,298-99 
forced, 296,297-98 
long, 295,296-97 
timidity, 227, 228,233, 
234,235, 280 
timing, 197 

mastering the art of, 
291-99 

tiny wound, image of, 308 
Titian, 46 ,339 
Tolstoy, Leo, 83, 152, 304, 
411 

Tomyris, Queen, 411-12 
“Tortoise, the Elephant, 
and the Hippopota¬ 
mus, The” (Zairean 
fable), 57-58 
tradition, 397-98, 399 
Treasury of Jewish Folklore, A 
(Ausubel, ed.), 
153-54, 201, 223-24 
Treaty of Versailles, 114 
tricks and techniques: 
concealment of, 245, 
247,251-52 
partial disclosure of, 
252-53 

Trojan Horse, image of, 93 
“Trout and the Gudgeon, 
The” (Dodsley), 296 
truth, appeal to, 263 
Ts’ao 'B’ao, 201-2,203, 
330,372-73 

Tsunehiro, Dainagon, 307 
Tu Fu, 365 
tulipomania, 120 
Turkey, 297,426 
Turner, Aaron, 45 
Timer,J. M.W., 188, 407 
turning the other cheek, 
163,169 
Tuscany, 361 
21 Histories, 183 
“Two Adventurers, The” 
(La Fontaine), 
228-29 


“Two Dogs, The” (Kriloff), 
179-80 

“Two Frogs, The” (Aesop), 
237 

“Two Horses, The” (Tol¬ 
stoy), 83 

types of people, 137-44 
Tyre, 331, 332 

Uccello, Paolo, 177, 251 
unassuming, plain, and 
often unintelligent 
man, dealing with, 
138-39 

unconventional ideas, 
flaunting of, 317-24 
unhappy and unlucky 
people, avoiding of, 
76-81 

uniqueness, 317 
unpredictability, 123-29 
Unspoken Way, The (Mat- 
sumoto), 336 
Urban VIIl, Pope, 186 
Urbino, Duke of, 340 
Use absence to increase 
respect and honor 
(Law 16), 115-22 
Use selective honesty and 
generosity to disarm 
your victim (Law 
12), 89-94 

Use the surrender tactic: 
transform weakness 
into power (Law 22), 
163-70 

us-versus-them dynamic, 
218-19 

Uzun Hasan, 297 

vacuum, cultural, 353-54 
reform and, 399 
vagueness, in creating cult, 
217 

“Vainglorious Cockerel, 
The” (Tolstoy), 411 
Valois, Charles de, 

361-62 

Valois, Marguerite de, 277 
value, 344 

Vanbrugh, John, 337-38 
Various Fables From Various 
Places (di Prima, ed.), 
337-38 

Vasari, Giorgio, 46, 135, 
251, 350-51 


Vasily III, Grand Duke, 
230-31 

Vega, Garcilaso de la, 

138 

Vel&zquez, Diego Ro¬ 
driguez de Silva, 

196, 354 

Venice, 150,151,152,264 

Bragadino and, 264-66, 
267,270 

Vermeer, Jan, 268-69 
Versailles, 2-3,132-33, 
134, 135, 184,349, 
353, 369,413 

Parc aux Cerfs at, 348, 
414 

Petit Trianon at, 368 
Versailles, Treaty of, 114 
Vettori, Francesco, xx 
victims: 

playing dumber than, 
156-62 

typology of, 138-39 
Victoria, Queen, 46,55, 
270 

victory, learning when to 
stop in, 410-18 
Viemetta, 116 
Vietnam War, 13,148 
Villa, Pancho, 301-3, 306 
vines with many thorns, 
image of, 88 
viper crushed beneath 
your foot but left 
alive, image of, 113 
Virchow, Rudolf, 255 
Virgin Queen, image of, 
149 

“Virtues of the Cock, The” 
(Chinese parable), 
117 

virus, image of, 80 
Visconti, Primi, 33 
visual images, 309,313, 
314-16 

in creating cult, 217-18 

symbols and, 314-15 
Vita di Michelangelo (Con- 
divi), 406-8 
Vitrolles, Baron de, 103 
Vollard, Ambroise, 260 
Voltaire, 3, 10, 165, 374, 
413 

on Machiavelli, 322 
vulgarity, 290 
vulture, image of, 60 




Wagner, Richard, 390-91 
waiting, 296, 297 
Wales, Prince of, 185 
Wang Mang, 397 
Waning of the Middle Ages, 
The (Huizinga), 
311-12 

warfare, strategy in, 
425-26 

Warhol, Andy, 35 
Warner, Jack L., 273-74 
Wamke, Martin, 46-47 
War of the Spanish Suc¬ 
cession, 21 

War of the Three King¬ 
doms, 330 

Warrior’s Mirror, 377 
Washington, George, 154, 
198,407 

“Wasp and the Prince, 
The” (Indian fable), 
45 

Watergate, 306 
Waterloo, Battle of, 63, 
294, 327 

Water Margin , The, 395 
weak links, 273 
weakness, xvtii, 367, 372, 
400, 426 

of others, discovering, 
271-81 

recovery from, 209 
transforming into 
power, 163-70 
working hard and, 211 
Wei, 370 

wei-chi (go), 363,423-24, 
426 

Weil, Joseph “Yellow 
Kid,” 21-22,212, 
269, 275-76, 288, 
345 ,346 

bank re-created by, 
388-89 

Geezil and, 23-25,27 
newsletter of, 314 


Weisleder, Dr. (the Moon 
Doctor of Berlin), 
310-11,313 
Wellington, Duke of, 
184-85 

Wellman, Francis L., 412 
Western Union, 28-29 
Westinghouse, George, 57 
When asking for help, ap¬ 
peal to people’s self- 
interest, never to 
their mercy or grati¬ 
tude (Law 13), 
95-100 

“When the Waters Were 
Changed” (Shah), 
319-20 

Whites, the, and the 

Blacks, 153,361-62 
Wilde, Oscar, 43,324 
William I, King of Prussia, 
19,84,85, 239, 
279-80 

Williams, Tennessee, 355 
Wilson, Woodrow, 301, 
302 

Win through your actions, 
never through argu¬ 
ment (Law 9), 

69-75 

withdrawal, 115-22, 256 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 

383 

Wolsey, Cardinal, 393 
“Wolves and the Sheep, 
The” (Aesop), 361 
words, images vs., 313 
working as a spy, while 
posing as a friend, 
101-6 

working hard, 211 
making accomplish¬ 
ments seem effort¬ 
less, 245—53 
work of others, using, 
56-61 


Work on the hearts and 
minds of others (Law 
43), 367-75 

“Works of Amasis, The” 
(Herodotus), 72-73 
World Championship of 
Chess, 124-26 
World War II, 422 
London bombings in, 
106 

MacArthur in, 354 
Paris liberation in, 315 
Wren, Christopher, 72-73 
wrestling master, 247-48 
writers, 374 
Wu, Duke, 92 
Wu, Empress (Wu Chao), 
110-11,113 

Wu, kingdom of, 168, 172 
WuCh’i, 416-17 
Wuge, 371 
Wutugu, King, 371 
Wu Tzu-hsiu, 172 

Xerxes, King, 318, 428 

Yeats, William Buder, 

250 

“Yellow Kid” Weil, 21-22, 
212,269, 275-76, 
288,545,346 
Yiddish folktale, 201 
Yorinobu, 246-47 
Yoshimoto, General, 416 
young people, 353,357, 
425 

YuHsiuSen, 117 

Zairean fable, 57-58 
Zauditu, Empress, 327 
Zeitgeist, 398 
Zelle, Margaretha (Mata 
Hari), 50-51,52,55, 
268 
Zeus, 352 
Zhang Yu, 67 








A moral, cunning, ruthless, aiul 
instructive, this piercing work distils 
three thousand years of the history of 
power into forty-eight well-explicated laws. 
As attention-grabbing in itsGetting Things Done 


the art of stress-free 
productivity 


David Allen 





PENGUIN BOOKS 
GETTING THINGS DONE 


David Allen has been called one of the world’s most 
influential thinkers on productivity and has been a keynote 
speaker and facilitator for such organizations as New York 
Life, the World Bank, the Ford Foundation, L.L. Bean, and 
the U.S. Navy, and he conducts workshops for individuals 
and organizations across the country. He is the chairman of 
the David Allen Company and has more than thirty-five 
years of experience as a management consultant and 
executive coach. His work has been featured in Fast 
Company, Fortune, the Los Angeles Times, the New York 
Times, the Wall Street Journal, and many other 
publications. Getting Things Done has been published in 
more than thirty foreign countries. Allen lives in 
Amsterdam, Netherlands. 


Praise for the First Edition of Getting 
Things Done 


“The Season’s Best Reads for Work-Life Advice ... my 
favorite on organizing your life: Getting Things Done... 
offers help building the new mental skills needed in an age 
of multitasking and overload.” 

—Sue Shellenbarger, The Wall Street Journal 


“T recently attended David’s seminar on getting organized, 
and after seeing him in action I have hope... . David Allen’s 
seminar was an eye-opener.” 

—Stewart Alsop, Fortune 


“Allen drops down from high-level philosophizing to the fine 
details of time management. Take a minute to check this 
one out.” 

—Mark Henricks, Entrepreneur 


“David Allen’s productivity principles are rooted in big 
ideas ... but they’re also eminently practical.” 
—Keith H. Hammonds, Fast Company 


“David Allen brings new clarity to the power of purpose, the 
essential nature of relaxation, and deceptively simple 
guidelines for getting things done. He employs extensive 
experience, personal stories, and his own recipe for 
simplicity, speed, and fun.” 
—Frances Hesselbein, chairman, board of 
governors, Leader to Leader Institute 


“Anyone who reads this book can apply this knowledge and 
these skills in their lives for immediate results.” 
—Stephen P Magee, chaired professor of business 
and economics, University of Texas at Austin 


“A true skeptic of most management fixes, I have to say 
David’s program is a winner!” 
—Joline Godfrey, CEO, Independent Means, Inc., 
and author of Our Wildest Dreams 


“Getting Things Done describes an incredibly practical 

process that can help busy people regain control of their 

lives. It can help you be more successful. Even more 

important, it can help you have a happier life!” 
—Marshall Goldsmith, coeditor, The Leader of the 
Future and Coaching for Leadership 


“WARNING: Reading Getting Things Done can be 
hazardous to your old habits of procrastination. David 
Allen’s approach is refreshingly simple and intuitive. He 
provides the systems, tools, and tips to achieve profound 
results.” 
—Carola Endicott, director, Quality Resources, New 
England Medical Center 


Getting 
Things 
Done 


The Art of 
Stress-Free Productivity 


Revised Edition 


David Allen 
o 





PENGUIN BOOKS 
Published by the Penguin Group 
Penguin Group (USA) LLC 
375 Hudson Street 
New York, New York 10014 


USA| Canada| UK| Ireland| Australia| New Zealand | India| South Africa | 
China 
penguin.com 
A Penguin Random House Company 


First published in the United States of America by Viking Penguin, a member 
of Penguin Putnam Inc., 2001 
Published in Penguin Books 2003 
This revised edition with a foreword by James Fallows published 2015 


Copyright © 2001, 2015 by David Allen 
Foreword copyright © 2015 by James Fallows 
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse 
voices, promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for 
buying an authorized edition of this book and for complying with copyright 
laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form 
without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to 
continue to publish books for every reader. 


ISBN 978-0-698-16186-3 


Cover design: Jason Ramirez 
Cover photograph courtesy of the author 


Version_1 


Contents 


About the Author 

Praise for David Allen 

Title Page 

Copyright 

Acknowledgments 

Foreword by James Fallows 
Introduction to the Revised Edition 


Welcome to Getting Things Done 


Part 1: The Art of Getting Things Done 
Chapter 1 A New Practice for a New Reality 


Chapter 2 Getting Control of Your Life: The Five Steps of 
Mastering Workflow 


Five Phases of Project Planning 


Part 2: Practicing Stress-Free Productivity 


Chapter 4 Getting Started: Setting Up the Time, Space, 
and Tools 





Chapter 5 Capturing: Corralling Your “Stuff” 








Chapter & Reflecting: Keeping It All Fresh and Functional 





Chapter 9 Engaging: Making the Best Action Choices 


Chapter 10 Getting Projects Under Control 





Part 3: The Power of the Key Principles 





Chapter 12 The Power of the Next-Action Decision 
Chapter 13 The Power of Outcome Focusing 


Chapter 14 GTD and Cognitive Science 





Chapter 15 The Path of GTD Mastery 
Appendix: Glossary of Getting Things Done Terms 


Index 


For Kathryn, my extraordinary partner in life and work 


Acknowledgments 


So many mentors, partners, colleagues, staff, clients, 
friends, and adopters of the Getting Things Done 
methodology around the world over the past decades have 
contributed to my understanding and development of these 
principles that singling out particular individuals to thank 
here is both necessary and unfair. So, my gratitude and 
apologies go to the many unnamed but still highly deserving 
in that group (and you know who you are!). 


It’s not what we have in our life, but who we have in our life, that 
counts. 


—J. M. Laurence 


In the early 1980s Dean Acheson and Russell Bishop 
provided me initial frameworks that seeded my awareness 
of the powerful methodology that was to become known 
around the world as GTD. Of the innumerable partners and 
colleagues who have added to this body of work and its 
distribution over the years, I must give special thanks to 
Marian Bateman, Meg Edwards, Ana Maria Gonzalez, Anne 
Gennett, Leslie Boyer, Kelly Forrister, John Forrister, Wayne 
Pepper, Frank Sopper, Maggie Weiss, and Mike Williams. 

In addition, many thousands of clients and workshop 
participants have helped validate and fine-tune these 
models. Particular thanks go to the senior human resource 
strategists who in the early years of this work recognized 


the significance of this material in bringing needed change 
to their corporate cultures, and who gave me the 
opportunity to do that—in particular: Michael Winston, Ben 
Cannon, Kevin Wilde, Susan Valaskovic, Patricia Carlyle, 
Manny Berger, Carola Endicott, Klara Sztucinski, and Elliott 
Kellman. 

This book could not have happened the way it has 
without the unique energies and perspectives of Tom 
Hagan, John and Laura McBride, Steve Lewers, Greg 
Stikeleather, Sam Spurlin, and my indefatigable agent, Doe 
Coover. And much credit is due both the editor of the first 
edition, Janet Goldstein, and my subsequent editor of this 
new version, Rick Kot, both of whom have provided 
marvelous (and patient) instruction in the art and craft of 
book writing. 

Finally, deepest thanks go to my spiritual coach, J-R, for 
being such an awesome guide and consistent reminder of 
my real priorities; and to my wife, Kathryn, for her trust, 
love, supportive hard work, companionship, and the 
multiple forms of beauty she has brought into my life. 


Foreword 


Book catatocs are full of listings for volumes that offer advice on 
how to improve your work habits, your health, your 
productivity, and your overall success in life. 

Some of what they say is typically dressed-up common 
sense. A fraction of it is baloney. Much of it is worth reading 
one time, if that, and is forgettable hours or days after you 
have put the book down. 

This book is different. It has sold steadily, in large 
numbers, since its first appearance, and the audience for 
David Allen’s programs and philosophies has grown in size 
and international reach. Speaking for myself, I can say that 
this is a book I read carefully when the original version 
came out, that I have revisited every year or two since then, 
and that I was very glad to learn was coming out in the 
updated and revised version you are reading now. 

What makes Getting Things Done different? In ascending 
order of importance, I would list these three qualities, each 
evident in nearly every chapter. 

One is its practicality, by which I really mean its modular 
and forgiving approach. Many self-improvement schemes 
work from an all-or-nothing, “everything must be different, 
starting tomorrow” premise. If you want to lose forty 
pounds, take control of your financial destiny, straighten out 
your family, or have the career of your dreams, you have to 
embrace a radical top-to-bottom change in every aspect of 
your life. 

Occasionally people do make these radical leaps: in 
programs for sobriety, in commitments to new diet-and- 


exercise plans after serious health scares, or even going 
into the monastery after a life in the business world. But for 
most people, most of the time, approaches that are 
incremental and forgiving of error are more likely to pay off 
in the long run. That way, if there is one part of the 
approach you forget or fall behind in, you don’t have to 
abandon all the rest. 

David Allen’s ambitions for his readers are in a sense 
even grander than those of most other books. His goal is 
nothing less than helping people remove stress and anxiety 
from their work and personal lives, so they can match every 
moment of their existence to the purposes they would most 
like to pursue. Yet with a very few exceptions—for instance, 
his sensible insistence on developing a “capture” habit, so 
that you are sure to write down or otherwise record every 
commitment you make or obligation you accept rather than 
torture yourself trying to remember them all, and the 
related insistence on having one central, trusted repository 
where you keep such data—a great advantage of his system 
is its modular nature. This book is full of advice that works 
better if embraced in its totality but is still useful when 
applied piece by piece. 

For instance: If you haven’t gone all the way with David 
Allen’s GTD system, you can still find value in his “two- 
minute rule” for disposing of obligations now rather than 
putting them off. (From chapter 6, the two-minute rule: “If 
an action will take less than two minutes, it should be done 
at the moment it’s defined.”) Or his emphasis, explained 
throughout the book, on relying on an “external brain” — 
that is, tools that can do routine categorizing and 
remembering for us, from simple folders in which to store 
receipts to established places in which you will always put 
keys, glasses, or other things you don’t want to hunt for 
each time. 

This is advice from a man who clearly understands that 
people are busy and fallible. He is writing to offer them 


additional helpful tips, rather than to give them extra 
reasons to feel guilty or inadequate. The book is also 
written with an understanding that life consists of cycles. 
Things go better, and then get worse. At some points we fall 
behind; at others, we catch up, or try to. When episodes 
occur, as they will for anyone, in which we are overwhelmed 
or unable to cope, the book suggests achievable day-by-day 
steps toward regaining a calm sense of control. 

A second virtue of the book is its open-ended adaptability. 
Through the decades since David Allen first began 
conceiving his approach to work and life, some practical 
aspects of personal organization have remained constant. 
There are only so many hours per day, even as we push 
back the frontiers of sleeplessness. There are only so many 
people with whom we can maintain serious connections, 
only so many things we can do at a time. Yet other aspects 
of the working life have changed radically. When the first 
edition of this book came out, e-mail was still an exciting 
new technology rather than a limitlessly guilt-inducing 
source of work still to be done. One of David Allen’s first 
technological projects was a program called “Actioneer,” a 
task-management system for the early PalmPilot. Now the 
Palm company and its once-revolutionary Pilot are gone; 
iPhone and Android smartphones have taken its place; and 
others now unimagined are sure to follow. 

In this new edition of the book as with its predecessor, 
David Allen is fully conversant with the technology of the 
moment. But unlike other management books that are 
closely tied to hardware or software of an era—Filofaxes in 
the 1980s, spreadsheets or PowerPoint decks more recently 
— Getting Things Done refers to but does not depend on any 
specific external systems. David Allen has updated the 
advice in this book to reflect what is different in modern 
technology and also (in fascinating detail) what modern 
brain science has revealed. But his outlook is always tied to 
timeless principles of how people manage their attention, 


emotions, and creativity. If this book is still being read a 
dozen years or more from now, as I think it will be, people 
in that era will be able to skip past the inevitably outdated 
references to technology to recognize the still-relevant 
insights into human nature. 

Third is a quality I have come to appreciate firsthand, as 
I have gotten to know David Allen and his wife Kathryn as 
friends, and that I think other people must have intuited 
from David’s work without ever meeting him. That is the 
wholeness and authenticity in David Allen’s 
recommendations, the connection between the person and 
the message he is delivering. 

As I learned when writing a profile of David Allen for the 
Atlantic in 2004, he has had a wide variety of careers and 
levels-of-luck in life. He has been a schoolboy actor, a 
debating champion, a karate practitioner and teacher, a 
waiter and a taxi driver and a manager of a lawn-service 
agency—and all of this before his decades of success as a 
consultant and productivity adviser. Echoes from that range 
of experience come through in David Allen’s advice, and his 
manner, not only in the real-world examples he can cite but 
also in his quite notable lack of selfimportance. 

There are times when we overlook the personal traits of 
a creator when assessing the importance of his or her work. 
For instance: by all accounts Steve Jobs was more 
admirable as a design pioneer than as a model of personal 
conduct. In other cases, the integral connection of a 
person’s life and thought add to the power of that person’s 
message. I can attest from personal experience with David 
and Kathryn Allen something that many readers might 
guess and most would hope: that he is doing his best to be 
honest about what he has learned from life. 

Some people will think they don’t “need” this book, and 
in a literal sense that is obviously true. Around the world 
and through the eons many people have led successful and 
satisfying lives in total ignorance of the “Getting Things 


Done” approach. But most people I know who have read 
this book have benefitted from the time they’ve taken to 
absorb its messages and their implications. Two of my tests 
for a book are whether I remember it a month or two after I 
have read it, and whether it affects my view of the world. By 
both tests Getting Things Done is, for me, a success. I am 
glad it is being introduced to a new generation of readers. 


—James Fallows 


James Fallows is a national correspondent for the Atlantic 
magazine and author of ten books, most recently China 
Airborne. He first wrote about David Allen in a 2004 article 
for the Atlantic called “Organize Your Life!” 


Introduction to the Revised 
Edition 


wnat FoLLows ts a total rewrite of the first edition of Getting 
Things Done, originally published in 2001—well, a sort of 
rewrite. I actually retyped the original manuscript, start to 
finish, with the goal of identifying and revising content and 
language that was either incomplete, outdated, or 
otherwise not optimal for keeping the book functional as a 
continuing and “evergreen” manual, one that would be 
useful globally and remain relevant and applicable for the 
twenty-first century and even beyond. I also wanted to 
incorporate the most significant and interesting things I’ve 
seen and learned about the methodology that Getting 
Things Done introduced as I’ve continued to be involved 
with it, in myriad ways, since the book’s first publication. 
That includes my own deeper understanding of its power, 
subtlety, and range of application, as well as how it has 
been received as awareness of it has spread around the 
world. 

What didn’t need to change as I reassessed the book 
were its fundamental principles and core techniques. As I 
crafted this new edition, reacquainting myself with what I 
wrote then was a gratifying acknowledgment that the 
principles of stress-free productivity I described and even 
most of the best practices of how to apply them haven’t 
wavered, nor will they, in the foreseeable future. In order 
for a space exploration team to land on Jupiter in 2109, 
they will have to employ the same principles for maintaining 


control and focus as anyone does today. They’ll still need 
some version of an in-tray (explained later) to capture 
potentially meaningful inputs they didn’t expect, in order to 
trust their choices about what to focus on during their first 
excursion. And next-action decision making will always be 
critical for successful execution of any task, whatever its 
scope. 

Because many elements of the way we live and work 
have changed since the first edition, though, I’ve made 
appropriate recalibrations in the fundamental material and 
will share my thoughts here about things that I consider 
new and interesting in this arena, offering relevant advice 
to both those new to this methodology and the GTD* 
aficionados who may be reading this edition and want to 
keep abreast of the latest developments concerning it. 


What’s New 


Here are some of the key areas in the “what’s new” 
category that have influenced my revision: 


The Rise of Digital Technology 


The continuing manifestation of Moore’s Law (digital 
processing power increasing exponentially over time), 
along with the social and cultural ramifications of the 
expansion of the digital world into our daily lives, never fails 
to surprise, delight, and overwhelm us. Because Getting 
Things Done deals primarily with the content and meaning 
of what we need to manage, irrespective of how it shows up 
or gets organized—whether in digital form or on paper— 
advances in technology are to some degree irrelevant to the 
essence of its methodology. An e-mail request means 


essentially the same thing and has to be processed the 
same way as a favor asked of you at the coffee machine. 

But the wired/wireless world has both enhanced and 
exacerbated how we can apply the core practices of 
capturing, organizing, and accessing what’s meaningful. 
While we now have access to lots of supertools and apps 
that show up on an almost daily basis and do really great 
stuff, that plethora of options can easily blow our 
productivity fuses. Staying on top of and leveraging ever- 
evolving technologies adds significant pressure to getting 
one’s appropriate workflow methodology right. 

I’ve accordingly changed some of my earlier emphases 
on types of tools that are best suited to particular tasks and 
acknowledged the ubiquity of our new digital and mobile 
world. I’ve also eliminated most of my references to specific 
software applications that appeared in the first edition. The 
rate of innovation in this area means that any specific 
software program can easily be outdated, upgraded, or 
undermined by the next new thing by the time you read 
about it. I’ve essentially hopped out of that fray, opting 
instead to provide a general model for how to evaluate the 
usefulness of any tool. 

For this edition I grappled with how much attention to 
continue to devote to paper-based tools and materials 
(especially for capturing, reference filing, and incubating), 
as many in the younger generations have come to believe 
they don’t have to deal with paper at all. At the risk of 
dating myself, I decided to leave most of those instructions 
from the first edition intact here, as many of the potential 
readers of this new edition around the world will still be at 
least partially paper based. Ironically, there is a growing 
resurgence of interest in the use of paper among the most 
sophisticatedly digital.* Time will tell whether we can ever 
truly get rid of that in-your-hand, in-your-face medium. 


The 24-7 World 


Nothing is new, except how frequently it is. 


I’m often asked what new advice GTD can offer to the 
mobile, connected, and always-on world. 

The necessity of dealing with frequent and complex 
barrages of potentially significant data was probably true in 
the past for remarkable individuals such as Napoleon as he 
marched through Europe, or Bach as he composed, or even 
Andy Warhol as he decided what to paint or show ina 
gallery. Now, though, the entire world’s digitally connected 
literate population is the recipient of an explosion of 
nonstop, potentially “important”—or at least relevant— 
information. The ease with which it can be accessed 
through technology has made it simultaneously rewarding 
in its opportunities and treacherous in its volume, speed, 
and changeability. If you are by nature fascinated by what 
may be going on when you hear sirens in your 
neighborhood or wonder what a group of people across the 
room at a party is excitedly talking about, then you are ripe 
for becoming a victim of the endless and powerful 
distractions your personal technology dishes out to you. 
Whether your experience with it is ultimately positive or 
negative depends primarily on the application of the 
practices in this book. 


The Globalization of GTD Methodology 


Anyone with the need to be accountable to deal with more than what 
he or she can complete in the moment has the opportunity to do so 
more easily and elegantly than in the mind. 


I’m often asked if the GTD process can translate into other 
cultures, and my answer has always been a resounding, “Of 
course.” The core message of the book is so inherently 
relevant to the human condition that I’ve yet to experience 
any cultural bias—nor frankly any gender, age, or 
personality-type differentials—in the applicability of the 
methodology. The awareness of the need for it and what 
purposes it will serve will, of course, be different for each 
individual. But that is more a function of one’s station in life, 
the nature of one’s work, and one’s interest in self- 
improvement than it is any of the other factors. In actual 
practice you will potentially have more in common with 
many hundreds of thousands of people around the world in 
your resonance with GTD than you will with your next-door 
neighbor or even your cousin Rafael! 

Since its initial publication, awareness of the Getting 
Things Done message has spread worldwide. The first 
edition has been translated into more than thirty 
languages, and our company has established franchises in 
many countries to provide training programs based on its 
content. While I was relatively confident about the cross- 
cultural coherence of this methodology when I wrote the 
book, the ensuing years have simply validated that 
confidence, in spades. 


An Approach That Is More Inclusive of a Larger 
Population of Readers and Users 


The primary impetus for my writing Getting Things Done 
was to craft a manual for the methodology that I had 
formulated, tested, and implemented, mostly in the 
corporate training and development world. In its examples, 
style, look, and feel (I wore a tie on the cover!), the book 
was initially and principally addressed to managers, 
executives, and higher-level, fast-track professionals. While 


I already knew that the material could be equally valuable 
for homemakers, students, clergy, artists, and even retirees, 
it was professionals who at that time were the most aware 
of the need for the kind of help I was seeking to provide, as 
a means both to advance their own development and 
productivity as well as to stay sane in the process. They 
were at the front lines, the advance guard, in engaging with 
the impending flood of information and rapid and 
significant change the business world was experiencing, 
and also had access to resources to tackle these issues. 


Getting Things Done is not simply about getting things done. It’s 
about being appropriately engaged with your work and life. 


Today there is a much more universal interest in the 
results that can be achieved with relaxed, focused control, 
and the realization that it is not just a one-shot recipe of 
“time management” tips simply for business professionals, 
but in fact a lifestyle practice, necessary to deal with the 
new world most all of us are experiencing. I regularly 
receive testimonials from a diversity of people around the 
world in an infinite variety of situations about the life- 
changing value they have experienced applying GTD 
principles. This validation of the growing need across the 
planet for such a model has inspired me to reframe many of 
my examples and the focus of that text to support it. 

From that perspective I have to acknowledge that even 
the title of this book can be somewhat misleading, giving 
many the impression that Iam somehow advocating 
working harder and longer to get more done. Productivity, 
unfortunately, does have connotations of both business and 
busy-ness. In truth, this book is not so much concerned with 
getting things done as it is championing appropriate 
engagement with your world—guiding you to make the best 


choice of what to do in each moment, and to eliminate 
distraction and stress about what you’re not doing. The 
resulting clarity and psychological space can benefit a much 
broader range of people than simply professionals on a 
corporate career track. 

Some of the most interesting endorsements of the value 
of applying the Getting Things Done principles and 
techniques have come from unexpected quarters. The head 
of the world’s largest finance organization, a popular 
American comedian, the most listened-to U.S. radio 
personality, the CEO of a major European conglomerate, 
one of the most successful Hollywood directors—all have 
attributed huge benefits in their life and work to GTD. 
Feedback from the clergy of many different religions has 
also been fascinating. While they’re responsible for 
handling otherworldly matters, they’ve been starved for 
ways to focus more in that realm with their flocks by freeing 
themselves of the distractions of the day-to-day business 
aspects of leading a congregation. Students, designers, 
doctors—the list of self-identified GTD advocates is endless. 

Over the years I’ve discovered that we’re all in this game 
together; it’s now great to have the opportunity to frame an 
outreach to encompass the full breadth of GTD users. 


A Greater Awareness of the Time and Energy 
Required for the Full Implementation of the GTD 
Process, and the Behavioral Changes Required to 
Maintain It 


Alas! As easy as it is to actually do what I suggest as best 
practices in this book, I have been rudely awakened to 
these two phenomena: (1) the amount of information and 
suggested activities here can easily be perceived as too 
overwhelming for someone to even begin to implement 


them; and (2) making some of the fundamental practices 
habitual can take quite a while for most people. 


Everything in life worth achieving requires practice. In fact, life itself 
is nothing more than one long practice session, an endless effort of 
refining our motions. When the proper mechanics of practicing are 
understood, the task of learning something new becomes a stress-free 
experience of joy and calmness, a process which settles all areas in 
your life and promotes proper perspective on all of life’s difficulties. 


—Thomas Sterner 


Because I have continued to resist “dumbing down” this 
model and its details, I’m not sure I can ever overcome the 
objection of “too much to absorb.” The first edition of 
Getting Things Done included detailed instructions and 
recommendations about how to fully implement its 
methodology in your life and work—and I have retained 
them here. I now know that for many who are new to this 
game, this will seem more than comfortable or possible to 
incorporate all at once. But I cannot with integrity hold 
back the instructions about how to really integrate this 
method into your everyday life, if you want to “go for it.” 

If you were interested in learning to play tennis, I 
wouldn't want to hold back at least a blueprint of the game, 
including a vision of excellence and the levels of learning 
and practice involved to get there. In the newly added 
chapter 15, I’ve sought to illuminate the depth and breadth 
of the game I’m introducing, and to make it more 
comfortable for you to take what you can and will from what 
you read and make it OK for you to simply glean and 
implement whatever you might from it, for now. I have 
attempted in this version of the book to add more 
graciousness to respect the potentially daunting task of 
rearranging your personal practices and systems. It’s really 
all about one step at a time. 


In every case, however, a key challenge is applying and 
sustaining these practices as an ongoing set of habits, to 
the point that they will require the minimal application of 
conscious focus, or “juice,” and merely become an everyday 
part of keeping one’s mental and physical environment in 
good order. I cannot pretend to be an expert in how to 
change one’s habits—I’ve been much more invested in 
figuring out and refining the practices of stress-free 
productivity.* The behavioral ingredients of GTD are 
actually relatively simple and familiar to everyone. How 
hard is it to write something down, decide what the next 
step is to move it forward, record the reminder of that ona 
list, and review the list? Most everyone admits he or she 
needs to establish a practice like this, and few do it 
consistently enough to feel good about it. How challenging 
it is for someone to internalize the need to consistently keep 
every unnecessary distraction out of his or her head has 
been one of my biggest surprises over the years. 


Information from Cognitive Science Research That 
Has Validated the Efficacy of the GTD Methodology 


For whatever deserves to exist deserves also to be known, for 
knowledge is the image of existence; and things mean and splendid 
exist alike. 


—Francis Bacon 


I no longer feel as much like “a voice, crying in the 
wilderness” as I did at the turn of the century, for since then 
scientific data has emerged validating the principles and 
practices prescribed in this book. The new chapter 14 here 
(“GTD and Cognitive Science”) features an examination of 
some of this research. 


If You Are New to This... 


... and if you’ve gotten this far in this Introduction, you’re 
probably interested in jumping in at some level of 
engagement. I’ve structured Getting Things Done asa 
practical manual—much like a cookbook that frames the 
basic principles, presents many layers of what cooking and 
serving a meal is all about, and gives enough specific 
recipes to enable you to make an infinite number of future 
dinners. If I’ve done a decent job in crafting this new 
edition, you can just start at the next chapter and take it 
from there, as you feel so moved. GTD principles, as they 
are laid out in the book, have been verified by many as a 
powerful experience to work through and apply. Or you can 
simply jump around—skim the text, randomly dive into a 
paragraph or two. The book has been written to serve you 
in that way as well. 


If You Already Have Some Getting Things 
Done Experience... 


... this will still be a new book. Over the many years that 
this information has been available in multiple forms, 
whenever anyone loops back through the material, they 
invariably have a response like, “Oh my God, this is totally 
different information and perspective than I could 
recognize and absorb when I read it earlier.” Even people 
who have reread the original edition of GTD as many as five 
times have professed to me, “It was a totally different book 
each time!” The experience is very much like reading a 
software manual a year later, after you’ve gotten the basics 
on “cruise control.” You’ll be amazed and enthused about 
all the cool stuff you realize you could be (and could have 
been) doing, right at your fingertips, but that you couldn’t 


recognize and implement, given the other major issues that 
needed to be addressed to set things up. 

No matter when or how many times you might have read 
an earlier version of Getting Things Done, or participated in 
any of the seminars, coaching, webinars, podcasts, or other 
presentations of this material, you will experience a novel 
and absorbing level of engagement in this revised edition. I 
promise you that. What will open up in the following pages 
is a new universe of ideas to incorporate, within the 
structure and tools you likely already have in place. 

Engaging with this book and the information within it will 
consistently provide a positive and productive mind-set 
about the aspects of your life and work that genuinely 
matter. 


Welcome to Getting Things Done 


weLcome to AgOld mine of insights into strategies for how to 
have more energy, be more relaxed, with more clarity and 
presence in the moment with whatever you’re doing, and 
get a lot more accomplished with much less effort. If you’re 
like me, you like getting things done and doing them well, 
and yet you also want to savor life in ways that seem 
increasingly elusive, if not downright impossible, if you’re 
working too hard. This doesn’t have to be an either-or 
proposition. It is possible to be effectively doing while you 
are delightfully being, in your ordinary workaday world. 


The art of resting the mind and the power of dismissing from it all care 
and worry is probably one of the secrets of our great men. 


—Capt. J. A. Hatfield 


I think efficiency is a good thing. Maybe what you’re 
doing is important, interesting, or useful; or maybe it isn’t 
but it has to be done anyway. In the first case you want to 
get as much return as you can on your investment of time 
and energy. In the second, you want to get on to other 
things as fast as you can, without any nagging loose ends. 

And whatever you’re doing, you’d probably like to be 
more relaxed, confident that whatever you’re doing at the 
moment is just what you need to be doing—that having a 
beer with your staff after hours, gazing at your sleeping 
child in his or her crib at midnight, answering the e-mail in 


front of you, or spending a few informal minutes with the 
potential new client after the meeting is exactly what you 
ought to be doing, as you’re doing it. 

Teaching you how to be maximally efficient and relaxed, 
whenever you need or want to be, was my main purpose in 
writing this book. And after many years of sharing this 
information and set of best practices around the world, in 
the most varied environments and with the widest range of 
people of all types and ages, I can unequivocally attest: it 
works. 

How do you know that what you’re doing is what you 
ought to be doing at any point in time? No software, 
seminar, cool notebook, smartphone, or even personal 
mission statement will give you more than twenty-four 
hours in a day, simplify its content, or make this often tough 
choice for you. 


As to methods there may be a million and then some, but principles 
are few. The man who grasps principles can successfully select his 
own methods. The man who tries methods, ignoring principles, is sure 
to have trouble. 


—Ralph Waldo Emerson 


Used appropriately, those kinds of tools can provide 
support for your decisions, but they don’t in and of 
themselves get you in control and focused. What’s more, 
just when you learn how to enhance your productivity at 
one level, you’ll graduate or be forced to the next accepted 
batch of responsibilities and creative goals, whose new 
challenges will defy the ability of any simple formula, 
buzzword du jour, or new digital mobile device to get you 
back “on your game” for your next stage in work and life. 
You may have established personal habits and tools that 
work for a while, but a major change, such as a big shift in 
your job, a first baby, or buying a home, will test their 


sustainability and likely create serious discomfort (if not 
havoc!). 

But if there’s no single technique or tool for perfecting 
organization and productivity, there are very specific things 
we do to facilitate them. Over the years I’ve uncovered 
simple processes that we can all learn to use that will vastly 
improve our ability to deal proactively and constructively 
with the mundane realities of the world, while still feeling 
connected to our more meaningful priorities. And those 
practices have proven to be viable universally across time. 
They apply if you’re trying to manage your homework at 
age twelve and if you need to regroup about your 
corporation’s strategies after your last board meeting... 
and to everything in between. 


Anxiety is caused by a lack of control, organization, preparation, and 
action. 


—David Kekich 


What follows is a compilation of more than three 
decades’ worth of discoveries about personal and 
organizational productivity—a guide to maximizing output 
and minimizing input, and to doing so in a world in which 
work is increasingly voluminous, ever shifting, and 
ambiguous. I (and many colleagues) have spent hundreds of 
thousands of hours coaching some of the brightest and 
busiest people you can imagine, “in the trenches” at their 
desks, in their homes with their doors closed, helping them 
capture, clarify, and organize all of their work and 
commitments at hand. The methods I have uncovered have 
proved to be highly effective in all types of organizations, at 
every job level, across cultures, and even at home and 
school. After years of coaching and training some of the 


most sophisticated and productive professionals (along with 
their kids!), I know the world is hungry for these methods. 

Executives at the top are looking to instill a standard of 
ruthless execution in themselves, their staffs, and their 
cultures, as well as how to keep their personal lives 
appropriately in balance and in play. They know, and I know, 
that behind closed doors, after hours, there remain 
unanswered calls, tasks to be delegated, unprocessed 
issues from meetings and conversations, senior-level 
accountabilities not yet clarified and under control, 
personal responsibilities unmanaged, and dozens of 
potentially important e-mails amid their hundreds (or even 
thousands) still not dealt with. Many of these 
businesspeople are successful because the crises they 
resolve and the opportunities they take advantage of are 
bigger than the problems they allow and create in their 
own offices, homes, and briefcases. But given the pace of 
business and life today, the equation is often in question. 

And, more critically for many, people are not paying 
appropriate attention to their kids’ school plays, sports 
games, or going-to-bed questions about life, or they’re 
simply not able to “be here now,” anywhere, anytime. An 
ambient angst pervades our society—there’s a sense that 
somehow there’s probably something we should be doing 
that we’re not, which creates a tension for which there is no 
resolution and from which there is no rest. 

On the one hand, we need proven tools that can help 
people focus their energies strategically and tactically 
without letting anything fall through the cracks. On the 
other, we need to create thinking habits and working 
environments that will keep the most caring and engaged 
people from burning out due to stress. We need positive 
work and lifestyle standards that will attract and retain the 
best and brightest in our organizations, and we need 
personal and home practices that foster clarity, control, and 


creativity for those we love and, most important, for 
ourselves. 

We know this information is sorely needed in 
organizations. It’s also needed in schools, where the vast 
majority of our kids are still not being taught how to 
process information, how to focus on outcomes, or what 
actions to take to make them happen. And for all of us 
individually, it’s needed so we can take advantage of all the 
opportunities we’re given to add value to our world ina 
sustainable, self-nurturing way. 


The power, simplicity, and effectiveness of what I’ll be 
presenting here is best experienced as an experience, in 
real time, with situations in your real world. As you read or 
skim the book, you will no doubt be motivated to think 
about how you would and could implement what I'll be 
talking about. You'll be greatly served by actually doing 
what you read about, as it occurs. That will take your 
understanding to a much deeper and more significant level. 
You'll find it useful to understand the models; you'll likely 
find it transformational to apply them. 


Healthy skepticism is often the best way to glean the value of what’s 
being presented—challenge it; prove it wrong, if you can. That creates 
engagement, which is the key to understanding. 


Necessarily, the book must put the essence of this 
dynamic art of workflow management and personal 
productivity into a linear format. I’ve tried to organize it in 
such a way as to give you both the inspiring big-picture 
view and a taste of immediate results as you go along. 


The book is divided into three parts. Part 1 describes the 
whole game, providing a brief overview of the system and 
an explanation of why it’s unique and timely, and then 
presenting the basic methodologies themselves in their 
most condensed and basic form. Part 2 shows you how to 
implement the system. It’s your personal coaching, step by 
step, on the nitty-gritty application of the models. Part 3 
goes even deeper, describing the subtler and more 
profound results you can expect when you incorporate the 
methodologies and models into your work and your life. 

There will be inevitable repetition in the content, in the 
three parts. The core methodology is relatively simple, but 
it can be expressed and understood at many different levels 
of depth and detail through the various lenses and lessons 
here. 

I want you to hop in, test this stuff out, even challenge it. 
I want you to find out for yourself that what I promise is not 
only possible but instantly accessible to you personally. And 
I want you to know that everything I propose is easy to do. 
It involves no new skills at all. You already know how to 
focus, how to write things down, how to decide outcomes 
and actions, and how to review options and make choices. 
You'll validate that many of the things you’ve been doing 
instinctively and intuitively all along are right. I’ll give you 
ways to leverage those basic skills into new plateaus of 
effectiveness. I want to inspire you to put all this into a new 
behavior set that will blow your mind. 

From time to time in the book I refer to my work with 
people applying this material. I’ve been a management 
consultant, executive coach, and trainer for the past three 
decades—alone, in small partnerships, and as founder of a 
global training company. My work has consisted primarily of 
doing private coaching, conducting workshops, and giving 
presentations based on the methods presented here. I (and 
my colleagues) have now worked with thousands of people 
individually and trained hundreds of thousands in our in- 


house and public seminars around the world. We continue 
to engage with some of the best and brightest people all 
over the world. This is the background from which I have 
drawn my experience and examples. 

I am a fellow student. I throw myself out of control and 
lose my focus, along with the rest and best of us. I equally 
must engage regularly with the practices I describe here, to 
keep myself clear with an optimal presence of mind. As I 
have described in chapter 15, this is a set of lifelong 
lifestyle habits that must be applied to engage in the world 
at more elevated and mature levels. I don’t share anything 
in this book I have not personally experienced and tested 
for its validity and that I don’t continue to use in some form. 

The promise here was well described by a client of mine, 
who wrote, “When I habitually applied the tenets of this 
program it saved my life ... when I faithfully applied them, 
it changed my life. This is the vaccination against day-to-day 
firefighting (the so-called urgent and crisis demands of any 
given workday) and an antidote for the imbalance many 
people bring upon themselves.” 


part 
1 


The Art of Getting 
Things Done 





A New Practice for a New Reality 


There is one thing we can do, and the happiest people are those who 
can do it to the limit of their ability. We can be completely present. We 
can be all here. We can give... our attention to the opportunity 
before us. 


—Mark Van Doren 


IT’S POSSIBLE FoR a person to have an overwhelming number of 
things to do and still function productively with a clear head 
and a positive sense of relaxed control. That’s a great way 
to live and work, at elevated levels of effectiveness and 
efficiency. It’s also the best way to be fully present with 
whatever you’re doing, appropriately engaged in the 
moment. It’s when time disappears, and your attention is 
completely at your command. What you’re doing is exactly 
what you ought to be doing, given the whole spectrum of 
your commitments and interests. You’re fully available. 
You’re “on.” 

This is an operational style now critical for successful, 
high-performing professionals; a necessary mode for the 
sanity of anyone experiencing overextended life situations; 
and a fundamental platform to allow all of us the freedom to 
involve ourselves optimally in our most meaningful 
endeavors. 

You already know how to do everything necessary to 
achieve this healthy, high-performance state. If you’re like 


most people, however, you need to apply these skills in a 
more timely, complete, and systematic way so you can get 
on top of it all instead of feeling buried. And though the 
method and the techniques I describe in this book are 
immensely practical and based on common sense, most 
people will have some major habits that must be modified 
before they can fully enjoy the benefits of this system. The 
small changes required—changes in the way you clarify and 
organize all the things that command your attention—could 
represent a significant alteration in how you approach some 
key aspects of your day-to-day activities. But the results are 
often reported as transformational. 

The methods I present here are all based on three key 
objectives: (1) capturing al/ the things that might need to 
get done or have usefulness for you—now, later, someday, 
big, little, or in between—in a logical and trusted system 
outside your head and off your mind; (2) directing yourself 
to make front-end decisions about all of the “inputs” you let 
into your life so that you will always have a workable 
inventory of “next actions” that you can implement or 
renegotiate in the moment; and (3) curating and 
coordinating all of that content, utilizing the recognition of 
the multiple levels of commitments with yourself and others 
you will have at play, at any point in time. 

This book offers a proven method for this kind of high- 
performance workflow management. It provides good tools, 
tips, techniques, and tricks for implementation. As you'll 
discover, the principles and methods are instantly usable 
and applicable to everything you have to do in your 
personal as well as your professional life.* You can 
incorporate, as many others have before you, what I 
describe as an ongoing dynamic style of operating in your 
work and in your world. Or, like still others, you can simply 
use this as a guide to getting back into better control when 
you feel you need to. 


The Problem: New Demands, Insufficient 
Resources 


Almost everyone I encounter these days feels he or she has 
too much to handle and not enough time to get it all done. 
In the course of a single week, I consulted with a partner in 
a major global investment firm who was concerned that the 
new corporate-management responsibilities he was being 
offered would stress his family commitments beyond the 
limits; and with a midlevel human resources manager 
trying to stay on top of her 150-plus e-mail requests per day 
fueled by the goal of doubling the company’s regional office 
staff from eleven hundred to two thousand people in one 
year, all as she tried to protect a social life for herself on the 
weekends. 

A paradox has emerged in this new millennium: people 
have enhanced quality of life, but at the same time they are 
adding to their stress levels by taking on more than they 
have resources to handle. It’s as though their eyes were 
bigger than their stomachs. The plethora of options and 
opportunities brings with it the pressures of decision 
making and choices. And most people are to some degree 
frustrated and perplexed about how to improve the 
situation. 


Work No Longer Has Clear Boundaries 


A major factor in the mounting stress level is that the actual 
nature of our jobs has changed much more dramatically 
and rapidly than have our training for and our ability to 
deal with work. In just the last half of the twentieth century, 
what constituted “work” in the industrialized world was 
transformed from assembly line, make-it-and-move-it kinds 


of activity to what the late Peter Drucker so aptly termed 
“knowledge” work. 

In the old days, work was self-evident. Fields were to be 
plowed, machines tooled, boxes packed, cows milked, crates 
moved. You knew what work had to be done—you could see 
it. It was clear when the work was finished, or not finished. 
Increasing your productivity was all about making the work 
process more efficient, or simply working harder or longer. 


Almost every project could be done better, and an infinite quantity of 
information is now available that could make that happen. 


Now, for many of us, there are no edges to most of our 
projects. Most people I know have at least half a dozen 
things they’re trying to achieve or situations they’d like to 
improve right now, and even if they had the rest of their 
lives to try, they wouldn’t be able to finish these to 
perfection. You’re probably faced with the same dilemma. 
How good could that conference be? How effective could 
the training program be, or the structure of your 
executives’ compensation package? How well could you 
manage your kids’ education? How close to perfect is the 
blog you’re writing? How motivating is the staff meeting 
you’re setting up? How healthy could you be? How 
functional is your department’s reorganization? And a last 
question: How much available data could be relevant to 
doing those projects “better”? The answer is: an infinite 
amount, easily accessible, or at least potentially so, through 
the Internet. 

On another front, the lack of edges can create more work 
for everyone. Many of today’s organizational outcomes 
require cross-divisional communication, cooperation, and 
engagement. Our individual office silos are crumbling (or at 
least need to be), and with them is going the luxury of not 


having to read cc’d e-mails from the marketing department, 
or from human resources, or from some ad hoc, deal-with-a- 
certain-issue committee. Add to that the increasing pull on 
your engagement with friends and family as distance from 
them disappears, with even aging parents taking to the 
Internet and their smartphones to “stay connected.” 

The ever-new communication technologies have 
exponentially magnified the lack of clear limits to our 
commitments and our lives. The second decade of this 
century witnessed an explosion of concern about the 
always-on conundrum, fueled by globalization (“half my 
team is in Hong Kong, and another key person in Estonia”), 
virtual work and connection capabilities, and not the least 
by the addiction to engaging with gadgets in our pockets 
and on our wrists that have more capacity than a room full 
of computers did in 1975. 

So, not only are work and its cognitive boundaries more 
ambiguous and ill defined, so are the time and space within 
which we can (and often should) be engaged with it, along 
with the continuing explosion of potentially meaningful and 
accessible data that could add value to our lives. 


Our Jobs (and Lives) Keep Changing 


The disintegrating edges of our projects and our work in 
general would be challenging enough for anyone. But now 
we must add to that equation the constantly shifting 
definition of our jobs, as well as the frequent changes in 
responsibilities and interests in the broader scope of our 
lives. 


Most of us have, in the past seventy-two hours, received more change- 
producing, project-creating, and priority-shifting inputs than our 
parents did in a month, maybe even in a year. 


I often ask in my seminar, “Which of you are doing only 
what you were hired to do? And how many of you have not 
had any significant change in your personal life in the past 
year?” Seldom do I get a raised hand. As amorphous as 
edgeless work may be, if you had the chance to stick with 
some specifically described job long enough, you’d probably 
figure out what you needed to do—how much, at what level 
—to stay sane. And if you could keep life in general more in 
check—no residence moves, no relationship changes, no 
emerging health or lifestyle issues for you and for loved 
ones, no financial surprises, no motivational programs 
generating inspiring new directions, no career shifts thrust 
on you—you might be able to create a rhythm and system of 
managing it that would allow for some relaxed stability. 


We can never really be prepared for that which is wholly new. We have 
to adjust ourselves, and every radical adjustment is a crisis in self- 
esteem; we undergo a test, we have to prove ourselves. It needs 
subordinate self-confidence to face drastic change without inner 
trembling. 


—Fric Hoffer 


But few have that luxury, for three reasons: 


1 | Organizations are now almost universally in morph 
mode, with ever-changing goals, products, partners, 
customers, markets, technologies, and owners. These 
all, by necessity, shake up structures, forms, roles, and 
accountabilities. 

| The average professional is more of a free agent these 
days than ever before, changing careers as often as his 
or her parents once changed jobs. Even forty- and 
fiftysomethings hold to standards of continual growth. 
Their aims are just more integrated into the 
mainstream now, covered by the catch-all arena of 


N 


“professional, management, and executive 
development”—which simply means they won’t keep 
doing what they’re doing for any extended period of 
time.~ 

| The relative speed of changes in our cultures, 
lifestyles, and technologies are creating greater 
necessity for individuals to take more control of their 
unique personal situations, more often. Suddenly 
needing to handle eldercare for a parent, dealing with a 
kid now back at home without a job, grappling with an 
unexpected health issue, or integrating a major change 
one’s life partner has decided to initiate ... all such 
seem to be happening with greater frequency, with 
larger consequences, than ever before. 


WwW 


Little seems clear for very long anymore, as far as what 
to do at the office, at home, on the plane, in the car, and at 
the local café—on the weekend, on Monday morning, on 
waking at three a.m., and on “vacation”; and what or how 
much input may be relevant to doing it well. We’re allowing 
in huge amounts of information and communication from 
the outer world and generating an equally large volume of 
ideas and agreements with others and ourselves from the 
inner world. And we haven’t been well equipped to deal 
with this huge number of internal and external 
commitments. 

Nothing is really new in this high-tech, globally wired 
world, except how frequently it is. When the pace of change 
in life and work was much slower, once people got past the 
inevitable discomfort of the new, they could hang out on 
cruise control for greatly extended periods of time. Most of 
us are now living in a world that does not afford that time- 
out kind of luxury. It’s changing while you’re reading this. 
And if, while you have been reading this, you’ve been 
distracted by your mind wandering to other things going on 


in your life, or you’ve felt impelled to check e-mail for 
potentially meaningful new input, you’re experiencing a 
manifestation of this don’t-miss-the-train syndrome. 


The Old Models and Habits Are Insufficient 


Neither our standard education, nor traditional time- 
management models, nor the plethora of digital and paper- 
based organizing tools available has given us a viable 
means of meeting the new demands placed on us. If you’ve 
tried to use any of these processes or tools, you’ve probably 
found them unable to accommodate the speed, complexity, 
and changing priority factors inherent in what you are 
doing. The ability to be focused, relaxed, and in control 
during these fertile but turbulent and often unstructured 
times demands new ways of thinking and working. There is 
a great need for new methods, technologies, and work 
habits to help us get on top of our world. 

The traditional approaches to time management and 
personal organization were useful in their time. They 
provided helpful reference points for a workforce that was 
just emerging from an industrial assembly-line modality into 
a new kind of work that included choices about what to do 
and discretion about when to do it. When time itself turned 
into a work factor, personal calendars became a key work 
tool. (Even in the 1980s many professionals considered 
having a pocket calendar the essence of being organized, 
and many people today still think of their calendar and 
possibly their e-mail and text in-boxes as the central tools 
for being in control.) Along with discretionary time came 
the need to make good choices about what to do. Creating 
“ABC” priority codes and daily “to-do” lists were key 
techniques developed to help people sort through their 
choices in some meaningful way. If you had the freedom to 


decide what to do, you also had the responsibility to make 
good choices, given your priorities. 

What you’ve probably discovered, at least at some level, 
is that a calendar, though important, can really effectively 
manage only a small portion of what you need to be aware 
of to feel on top of your world. And daily to-do lists and 
simplified priority coding have proven inadequate in 
dealing with the volume and variable nature of the average 
person’s workload. More and more people’s jobs and lives 
are made up of hundreds of e-mails and texts a day, with no 
latitude left to ignore a single request, complaint, order, or 
communication from company or family. There are few 
people who can (or even should) expect to code everything 
based upon its priority, or who can maintain some 
predetermined list of to-dos that the first telephone call or 
instant message or interruption from their boss or spouse 
won't totally undo. 


The Big Picture vs. the Nitty-Gritty 


The winds and waves are always on the side of the ablest navigators. 


—Edward Gibbon 


At the other end of the spectrum, a huge number of 
business books, models, seminars, and gurus have 
championed the “bigger view” as the solution to dealing 
with our complex world. Clarifying major goals and values, 
so the thinking goes, gives order, meaning, and direction to 
our work. In practice, however, the well-intentioned 
exercise of values thinking too often does not achieve its 
desired results. I have seen too many of these efforts fail, 
for one or more of the following three reasons: 


1 | There is too much distraction at the day-to-day, hour- 
to-hour level of commitments to allow for appropriate 
focus on the higher levels. 

| Ineffective personal organizational systems create 

huge subconscious resistance to undertaking even 

bigger projects and goals that will likely not be 
managed well, and that will in turn cause even more 
distraction and stress. 

3 | When loftier levels and values actually are clarified, it 
raises the bar of our standards, making us notice that 
much more that needs changing. We are already having 
a serious negative reaction to the overwhelming 
number of things we have to do. And what created 
much of the work that’s on those lists in the first place? 
Our values! 


N 


Focusing on primary outcomes and values is a critical 
exercise, certainly. It provides needed criteria for making 
sometimes-difficult choices about what to stop doing, as 
well as what most ought to have our attention amid our 
excess of options. But it does not mean that there is less to 
do, or fewer challenges in getting the work done. Quite the 
contrary: it just ups the ante in the game, which still must 
be played day to day. For a human resources executive, for 
example, deciding to deal with quality-of-work-life issues in 
order to attract and keep key talent does not make things 
simpler. Nor would there be less to do for a mother 
recognizing the importance of providing valuable 
experiences for her teenage daughter in the few vacations 
left they may take together before she leaves home for 
work or college. Upping the quality of our thinking and 
commitments does not diminish the quantity of potentially 
relevant and important stuff to manage. 


Chaos isn’t the problem; how long it takes to find coherence is the real 
game. 


—Doc Childre and Bruce Cryer 


There has been a missing piece in our culture of 
knowledge work: a system with a coherent set of behaviors 
and tools that functions effectively at the level at which 
work really happens. It must incorporate the results of big- 
picture thinking as well as the smallest of open details. It 
must manage multiple tiers of priorities. It must maintain 
control over hundreds of new inputs daily. It must save a lot 
more time and effort than are needed to maintain it. It must 
make it easier to get things done. 


The Promise: The “Ready State” of the 
Martial Artist 


Reflect for a moment on what it actually might be like if 
your personal management situation were totally under 
control, at all levels and at all times. What if you had 
completely clear mental space, with nothing pulling or 
pushing on you unproductively? What if you could dedicate 
fully 100 percent of your attention to whatever was at hand, 
at your own choosing, with no distraction? 

It is possible. There is a way to get a grip on it all, stay 
relaxed, and get meaningful things done with minimal 
effort, across the whole spectrum of your life and work. You 
can experience what the martial artists call a “mind like 
water” and top athletes refer to as the “zone,” within the 
complex world in which you’re engaged. In fact, you have 
probably already been in this state from time to time. 


Life is denied by lack of attention, whether it be to cleaning windows 
or trying to write a masterpiece. 


—Nadia Boulanger 


It’s a condition of working, doing, and being in which the 
mind is clear and constructive things are happening. It’s a 
state that is accessible to everyone, and one that is 
increasingly needed to deal effectively with the complexity 
of life in this century. More and more it will be a required 
condition for any of us who wish to maintain balance and a 
consistent positive output in our work and outlook in our 
life. World-class rower Craig Lambert has described how it 
feels in Mind Over Water (Houghton Mifflin, 1998): 


Rowers have a word for this frictionless state: swing... . 
Recall the pure joy of riding on a backyard swing: an 
easy cycle of motion, the momentum coming from the 
swing itself. The swing carries us; we do not force it. We 
pump our legs to drive our arc higher, but gravity does 
most of the work. We are not so much swinging as being 
swung. The boat swings you. The shell wants to move 
fast: Speed sings in its lines and nature. Our job is 
simply to work with the shell, to stop holding it back 
with our thrashing struggles to go faster. Trying too hard 
sabotages boat speed. Trying becomes striving and 
striving undoes itself. Social climbers strive to be 
aristocrats but their efforts prove them no such thing. 
Aristocrats do not strive; they have already arrived. 
Swing is a State of arrival. 


The “Mind Like Water” Simile 


In karate there is an image that’s used to define the 
position of perfect readiness: “mind like water.” Imagine 
throwing a pebble into a still pond. How does the water 
respond? The answer is, totally appropriately to the force 
and mass of the input; then it returns to calm. It doesn’t 
overreact or underreact. 


Your ability to generate power is directly proportional to your ability to 
relax. 


Water is what it is, and does what it does. It can 
overwhelm, but it’s not overwhelmed. It can be still, but it is 
not impatient. It can be forced to change course, but it is 
not frustrated. Get it? 

The power in a karate punch comes from speed, not 
muscle; it comes from a focused “pop” at the end of the 
whip. That’s why petite people can learn to break boards 
and bricks with their hands: it doesn’t take calluses or 
brute strength; just the ability to generate a focused thrust 
with speed. But a tense muscle is a slow one. So the high 
levels of training in the martial arts teach and demand 
balance and relaxation as much as anything else. Clearing 
the mind to being open and appropriately responsive is the 
key. 

Anything that causes you to overreact or underreact can 
control you, and often does. Responding inappropriately to 
your e-mail, your thoughts about what you need to do, your 
children, or your boss will lead to less effective results than 
you'd like. Most people give either more or less attention to 
things than they deserve, simply because they don’t operate 
with a mind like water. 


Can You Get into Your “Productive State” When 
Required? 


Think about the last time you felt highly productive. You 
probably had a sense of being in control, you were not 
stressed out, you were highly focused on what you were 
doing, time tended to disappear (lunchtime already?), and 
you felt you were making noticeable progress toward a 
meaningful outcome. Would you like to have more such 
experiences? 


If your mind is empty, it is always ready for anything; it is open for 
everything. 


—Shunryu Suzuki 


And if you get seriously far out of that state—and start to 
feel out of control, stressed out, unfocused, bored, and 
stuck—do you have the ability to get yourself back into it? 
That’s where the methodology of Getting Things Done will 
have the greatest impact on your life, by showing you how 
to get back to mind like water, with all your resources and 
faculties functioning at a maximum level. A challenge for 
many may be the lack of a reference point as to when they 
fall out of the productive state. Most people have lived in a 
semistressful experience so consistently, for so long, they 
don’t know that it could be quite different—that there is 
another and more positive place from which to engage with 
their world. Hopefully this book will inspire you to raise the 
bar about how much pressure you will allow yourself to 
tolerate, knowing you have the techniques to reduce it. 


The Principle: Dealing Effectively with 
Internal Commitments 


A basic truism I have discovered over decades of coaching 
and training thousands of people is that most stress they 
experience comes from inappropriately managed 
commitments they make or accept. Even those who are not 
consciously “stressed out” will invariably experience 
greater relaxation, better focus, and increased productive 
energy when they learn more effectively to control the 
“open loops” of their lives. 

You’ve probably made many more agreements with 
yourself than you realize, and every single one of them—big 
or little—is being tracked by a less-than-conscious part of 
you. These are the “incompletes,” or “open loops,” which I 
define as anything pulling at your attention that doesn’t 
belong where it is, the way it is. Open loops can include 
everything from really big to-do items like “End world 
hunger” to the more modest “Hire new assistant” to the 
tiniest task such as “Replace porch lightbulb.” 


Anything that does not belong where it is, the way it is, is an “open 
loop,” which will be pulling on your attention if it’s not appropriately 
managed. 


In order to deal effectively with all of that, you must first 
identify and capture all those things that are “ringing your 
bell” in some way, clarify what, exactly, they mean to you, 
and then make a decision about how to move on them. That 
may seem like a simple process, but in reality most people 
don’t do it in a consistent way. They lack the knowledge or 
the motivation, or both, and most likely because they aren’t 
aware of the prices paid for neglecting that practice. 


The Basic Requirements for Managing Commitments 


Managing commitments well requires the implementation 
of some basic activities and behaviors: 


e First of all, if it’s on your mind, your mind isn’t clear. 
Anything you consider unfinished in any way must be 
captured in a trusted system outside your mind, or what 
I call a collection tool, that you know you'll come back to 
regularly and sort through. 

e Second, you must clarify exactly what your commitment 
is and decide what you have to do, if anything, to make 
progress toward fulfilling it. 

e Third, once you’ve decided on all the actions you need 
to take, you must keep reminders of them organized in 
a system you review regularly. 


You must use your mind to get things off your mind. 


An Important Exercise to Test This Model 


I suggest that you write down the project or situation that is 
most on your mind at this moment. What most bugs you, 
distracts you, or interests you, or in some other way 
consumes a large part of your conscious attention? It may 
be a project or problem that is really “in your face,” 
something you are being pressed to handle, or a situation 
you feel you must deal with sooner rather than later. 

Maybe you have a holiday trip coming up that you need 
to make some major last-minute decisions about. You just 
read an e-mail about a new and pressing issue in your 
department. Or perhaps you just inherited six million 
dollars and you don’t know what to do with the cash. 
Whatever. 


Got it? Good. Now, describe, in a single written sentence, 
your intended successful outcome for this problem or 
situation. In other words, what would need to happen for 
you to check this project off as “done”? It could be as simple 
as “Take the Hawaii vacation,” “Handle situation with 
customer X,” “Resolve college situation with Susan,” 
“Clarify new divisional management structure,” “Implement 
new investment strategy,” or “Research options for dealing 
with Manuel’s reading issue.” All clear? Great. 

Now write down the very next physical action required 
to move the situation forward. If you had nothing else to do 
in your life but get closure on this, what visible action would 
you take right now? Would you call or text someone? Write 
an e-mail? Take pen and paper and brainstorm about it? 
Surf the Web for data? Buy nails at the hardware store? 
Talk about it face-to-face with your partner, your assistant, 
your attorney, or your boss? What? 

Got the answer to that? Good. 

Was there any value for you in those two minutes of 
thinking? If you’re like the vast majority of people who 
complete that drill in our seminars, you’ll be experiencing 
at least a tiny bit of enhanced control, relaxation, and focus. 
You'll also be feeling more motivated to actually do 
something about that situation you’ve merely been thinking 
about till now. Imagine that motivation magnified a 
thousandfold, as a way to live and work. 


Think like a man of action, act like a man of thought. 


—Henri Bergson 


If anything at all positive happened for you in this little 
exercise, think about this: What changed? What happened 
to create that improved condition within your own 
experience? The situation itself is no further along, at least 


in the physical world. It’s certainly not finished yet. What 
probably happened is that you acquired a clearer definition 
of the outcome desired and the next action required. What 
did change is the most important element for clarity, focus, 
and peace of mind: how you are engaged with your world. 

But what created that? Not “getting organized” or 
“setting priorities.” The answer is, thinking. Not a lot; just 
enough to solidify your commitment about a discrete 
pressure or opportunity and the resources required dealing 
with it. People think a lot, but most of that thinking is ofa 
problem, project, or situation—not about it. If you actually 
did this suggested exercise, you were required to structure 
your thinking toward an outcome and an action, and that 
does not usually happen without a consciously focused 
effort. Reacting is automatic, but thinking is not. 


The Real Work of Knowledge Work 


The ancestor of every action is a thought. 


—Ralph Waldo Emerson 


Welcome to the real-life experience of “knowledge work,” 
and a profound operational principle: you have to think 
about your stuff more than you realize but not as much as 
you’re afraid you might. As Peter Drucker wrote: “In 
knowledge work .. . the task is not given; it has to be 
determined. ‘What are the expected results from this 
work?’ is... the key question in making knowledge workers 
productive. And it is a question that demands risky 
decisions. There is usually no right answer; there are 
choices instead. And results have to be clearly specified, if 
productivity is to be achieved.”* 


Most people have a resistance to initiating the burst of 
energy that it will take to clarify the real meaning, for them, 
of something they have let into their world, and to decide 
what they need to do about it. We’re never really taught 
that we have to think about our work before we can do it; 
much of our daily activity is already defined for us by the 
undone and unmoved things staring at us when we come to 
work, or by the family to be fed, the laundry to be done, or 
the children to be dressed at home. Thinking in a 
concentrated manner to define desired outcomes and 
requisite next actions is something few people feel they 
have to do (until they have to). But in truth, it is the most 
effective means available for making wishes a reality. 


Why Things Are on Your Mind 


Most often, the reason something is on your mind is that 
you want it to be different than it currently is, and yet: 


e you haven’t clarified exactly what the intended outcome 
is; 


This consistent, unproductive preoccupation with all the things we 
have to do is the single largest consumer of time and energy. 


—Kerry Gleeson 


e you haven’t decided what the very next physical action 
step is; and/or 

e you haven’t put reminders of the outcome and the 
action required in a system you trust. 


That’s why it’s on your mind. Until those thoughts have 
been clarified and those decisions made, and the resulting 


data has been stored in a system that you absolutely know 
you will access and think about when you need to, your 
brain can’t give up the job. You can fool everyone else, but 
you can’t fool your own mind. It knows whether or not 
you’ve come to the conclusions you need to, and whether 
you’ve put the resulting outcomes and action reminders in a 
place that can be trusted to resurface appropriately within 
your conscious mind.* If you haven’t done those things, it 
won't quit working overtime. Even if you’ve already decided 
on the next step you'll take to resolve a problem, your mind 
can’t let go until and unless you park a reminder in a place 
it knows you will, without fail, look. It will keep pressuring 
you about that untaken next step, usually when you can’t do 
anything about it, which will just add to your stress. 


Your Mind Doesn’t Have a Mind of Its Own 


At least a portion of your mind is really kind of stupid, in an 
interesting way. If it had any innate intelligence and logic, it 
would remind you of the things you needed to do only when 
you could do something about them. 

Do you have a flashlight somewhere with dead batteries 
in it? When does your mind tend to remind you that you 
need more batteries? When you notice the dead ones! 
That’s not very smart. If your mind had any innate 
intelligence, it would remind you about those dead batteries 
only when you passed new ones in a store. And ones of the 
right size, to boot. 


Rule your mind or it will rule you. 


—Horace 


Between the time you woke up today and now, did you 
think of anything you needed to do that you still haven’t 
done? Have you had that thought more than once? Why? 
It’s a waste of time and energy to keep thinking about 
something that you make no progress on. And it only adds 
to your anxiety about what you should be doing and aren’t. 

Most people let their reactive mental process run a lot of 
the show, especially where the too-much-to-do syndrome is 
concerned. You’ve probably given over a lot of your “stuff,” 
a lot of your open loops, to an entity on your inner 
committee that is incapable of dealing with those things 
effectively the way they are—your mind. Research has now 
proven that a significant part of your psyche cannot help 
but keep track of your open loops, and not (as originally 
thought) as an intelligent, positive motivator, but asa 
detractor from anything else you need or want to think 
about, diminishing your capacity to perform. 


The Transformation of “Stuff” 


Here’s how I define “stuff”: anything you have allowed into 
your psychological or physical world that doesn’t belong 
where it is, but for which you haven’t yet determined what, 
exactly, it means to you, with the desired outcome and the 
next action step. The reason most organizing systems 
haven’t worked for most people is that they haven’t yet 
transformed all the stuff they’re trying to organize. As long 
as it’s still stuff, it’s not controllable. 


We need to transform all the “stuff” we’ve attracted and accumulated 
into a clear inventory of meaningful actions, projects, and usable 
information. 


Almost all of the to-do lists I have seen over the years 
(when people had them at all!) were merely listings of stuff, 
not inventories of the resultant real work that needed to be 
done. They were partial reminders of a lot of things that 
were unresolved and as yet untranslated into outcomes and 
actions—that is, the real outlines and details of what the list 
maker had to do. 

Typical things you will see on a to-do list: “Mom” “Bank” 
“Doctor” “Baby-sitter” “VP Marketing” etc. Looking at these 
often creates more stress than relief, because, though it is a 
valuable trigger for something that you’ve committed to do 
or decide something about, it still calls out psychologically, 
“Decide about me!” And if you do not have the energy or 
focus at the moment to think and decide, it will simply 
remind you that you are overwhelmed. 

Stuff is not inherently a bad thing. Things that command 
or attract our attention, by their very nature, usually show 
up as stuff. But once we allow stuff to come into our lives 
and work, we have an inherent commitment to ourselves to 
define and clarify its meaning. In the professional world, 
our jobs require us to think, assess, decide, and execute— 
minute by minute—whether about an e-mail or our notes 
from the morning’s strategy meeting. That’s inherent in 
your job. If you didn’t have to think about those things, 
you’re probably not required to. And personally, we will 
shortchange ourselves when we allow issues in our daily 
lifestyle—home, family, health, finances, career, or 
relationships—to lie fallow in our consciousness because of 
lack of definition of the specific outcomes desired and 
actions required. 


Thought is useful when it motivates action and a hindrance when it 
substitutes for action. 


—Bill Raeder 


At the conclusion of one of my seminars, a senior 
manager of a major biotech firm looked back at the to-do 
list she had come in with and said, “Boy, that was an 
amorphous blob of undoability!” That’s the best description 
I have ever heard about what passes for organizing lists in 
most systems. The vast majority of people have been trying 
to get organized by rearranging incomplete lists of unclear 
things; they haven’t yet realized how much and what they 
need to organize in order to get the real payoff. They need 
to gather everything that requires thinking about and then 
do that thinking if their organizational efforts are to be 
successful. 


The Process: Managing Action 


You can train yourself, almost like an athlete, to be faster, 
more responsive, more proactive, and more focused in 
dealing with all the things you need to deal with. You can 
think more effectively and manage the results with more 
ease and control. You can minimize the loose ends across 
the whole spectrum of your work life and personal life and 
get a lot more done with less effort. And you can make 
front-end decision making about all the stuff you collect and 
create standard operating procedure for living and working 
in this millennium. 

Before you can achieve any of that, though, you’ll need to 
get in the habit of keeping nothing on your mind. And the 
way to do that, as we’ve seen, is not by managing time, 
managing information, or managing priorities. After all: 


e you don’t manage five minutes and wind up with six; 

e you don’t manage information overload—otherwise 
you’d walk into a library and die, or the first time you 
connected to the Web, you’d blow up; and 


e you don’t manage priorities—you have them. 


Instead, the key to managing all of your stuff is managing 
your actions. 


The beginning is half of every action. 


—Greek proverb 


Managing Action Is the Prime Challenge 


What you do with your time, what you do with information, 
and what you do with your body and your focus relative to 
your priorities—those are the real options to which you 
must allocate your limited resources. The substantive issue 
is how to make appropriate choices about what to do at any 
point in time. The real work is to manage our actions. 

That may sound obvious. However, it might amaze you to 
discover how many next actions for how many projects and 
commitments remain undetermined by most people. It’s 
extremely difficult to manage actions you haven’t identified 
or decided on. Most people have dozens of things that they 
need to do to make progress on many fronts, but they don’t 
yet know what they are. And the common complaint that “I 
don’t have time to ___” (fill in the blank) is understandable 
because many projects seem overwhelming—and are 
overwhelming because you can’t doa project at all! You can 
only do an action related to it. Many actions require only a 
minute or two, in the appropriate context, to move a project 
forward. 


Things rarely get stuck because of lack of time. They get stuck 
because what “doing” would look like, and where it happens, hasn’t 
been decided. 


In training and coaching many thousands of people, I 
have found that lack of time is not the major issue for them 
(though they may think it is); the real problem is a lack of 
clarity and definition about what a project really is, and 
what associated next-action steps are required. Clarifying 
things on the front end, when they first appear on the 
radar, rather than on the back end, after trouble has 
developed, allows people to reap the benefits of managing 
action. 

Getting things done requires two basic components: 
defining (1) what “done” means (outcome) and (2) what 
“doing” looks like (action). And these are far from self- 
evident for most people about most things that have their 
attention. 


The Value of a Bottom-Up Approach 


I have discovered over the years the practical value of 
working on personal productivity improvement from the 
bottom up, starting with the most mundane, ground-floor 
level of current activity and commitments. Intellectually, the 
most appropriate way ought to be to work from the top 
down, first uncovering personal and organizational purpose 
and vision, then defining critical objectives, and finally 
focusing on the details of implementation. The trouble is, 
however, that most people are so embroiled in 
commitments on a day-to-day level that their ability to focus 
successfully on the larger horizon is seriously impaired. 
Consequently, a bottom-up approach is usually more 
effective. 

Getting current on, and in control of, what’s in your in- 
tray and on your mind right now, and incorporating 
practices that you can trust will help you stay that way, will 


provide the best means of broadening your horizons. A 
creative, buoyant energy will be unleashed that will better 
support your focus on new heights, and your confidence will 
increase to handle what that creativity produces. An 
immediate sense of freedom, release, and inspiration 
naturally comes to people who roll up their sleeves and 
implement this process. 


Vision is not enough; it must be combined with venture. It is not 
enough to stare up the steps; we must step up the stairs. 


—Vaclav Havel 


You'll be better equipped to undertake higher-focused 
thinking when your tools for handling the resulting actions 
for implementation are part of your ongoing operational 
style. There are more meaningful things to think about than 
your in-tray, but if your management of that level is not as 
efficient as it could be, it’s like trying to swim in baggy 
clothing. 

Many executives I have worked with during the day to 
clear the decks of their mundane stuff have spent the 
evening having a stream of ideas and visions about their 
company and their future lifestyle. This happens as an 
automatic consequence of unsticking their workflow. 


Horizontal and Vertical Action Management 


You need to control commitments, projects, and actions in 
two ways—horizontally and vertically. Horizontal control 
maintains coherence across all the activities in which you 
are involved. Imagine your psyche constantly scanning your 
environment like a police radar; it may land on any ofa 
thousand different items that invite or demand your 


attention during any twenty-four-hour period: the 
drugstore, your daughter’s boyfriend, the board meeting, 
your aunt Martha, an incoming text message, the strategic 
plan, lunch, a wilting plant in the office, an upset customer, 
shoes that need shining. You need to buy stamps, figure out 
what to do about the presentation tomorrow, deposit that 
check, make the hotel reservation, cancel a meeting, and 
watch a movie tonight. You might be surprised at the 
volume of things you actually think about and have to deal 
with just in one day. You need a good system that can keep 
track of as many of them as possible, supply required 
information about them on demand, and allow you to shift 
your focus from one thing to the next quickly and easily. 

Vertical control, in contrast, manages thinking, 
development, and coordination of individual topics and 
projects. For example, your inner “police radar” lands on 
your next vacation as you and your life partner talk about it 
over dinner—where and when you'll go, what you’ll do, how 
to prepare for the trip, and so on. Or you and your boss 
need to make some decisions about the new departmental 
reorganization you’re about to launch. Or you just need to 
get your thinking up-to-date on the customer you’re about 
to call. This is “project planning” in the broad sense. It’s 
focusing in on a single endeavor, situation, or person and 
fleshing out whatever ideas, details, priorities, and 
sequences of events may be required for you to handle it, at 
least for the moment. 

The goal for managing horizontally and vertically is the 
same: to get things off your mind and get them done. 
Appropriate action management lets you feel comfortable 
and in control as you move through your broad spectrum of 
work and life, while appropriate project focusing gets you 
clear about and on track with the specifics needed. 


The Major Change: Getting It All Out of Your Head 


There is usually an inverse relationship between how much something 
is on your mind and how much it’s getting done. 


There is no real way to achieve the kind of relaxed control 
I’m promising if you keep things only in your head. As you'll 
discover, the individual behaviors described in this book are 
things you’re already doing. The big difference between 
what I do and what others do is that I capture and organize 
100 percent of my stuff in and with objective tools at hand, 
not in my mind. And that applies to everything—little or big, 
personal or professional, urgent or not. Everything.~ 

I’m sure that at some time or other you’ve gotten to a 
point in a project, or in your life, where you just had to sit 
down and make a list. Subsequently you felt at least slightly 
more focused and in control. If so, you have a reference 
point for what I’m talking about. Nothing externally 
changed in your world, and yet you felt better about it. 
What did change, significantly, is how you were engaged 
with your world. That always happens when you get 
potentially meaningful things out of your head. Most people, 
however, do that kind of list-making drill only when the 
confusion gets too unbearable and they just have to do 
something about it. They usually, though, only make a list 
about the specific area that’s bugging them. But if you 
made that kind of externalization and review a 
characteristic of your ongoing life- and work style, and you 
maintained it across all areas of your life (not just the most 
“urgent”), you'd be practicing the kind of mind like water 
management style I’m describing. In my experience this 
process always improves our perspective and our 
experience. Why wait? 


There is no reason to ever have the same thought twice, unless you 
like having that thought. 


I try to make intuitive choices based on my options, 
instead of trying to think about what those options are. I 
need to have thought about all of that already and captured 
the results in a trusted way. I don’t want to waste time 
thinking about things more than once. That’s an inefficient 
use of creative energy and a source of frustration and 
stress. 


Any “would, could, or should” commitment held only in the psyche 
creates irrational and unresolvable pressure, 24-7. 


And you can’t fudge this thinking. Your mind will keep 
working on anything that’s still in that undecided state. But 
that kind of recursive spinning in your mind has now been 
proven to reduce your capacity to think and perform, and 
there’s a limit to how much unresolved stuff it can contain 
before it blows a fuse. 

The short-term-memory part of your mind—the part that 
tends to hold all of the incomplete, undecided, and 
unorganized stuff—functions much like RAM (random- 
access memory) on a computer. Your conscious mind, like 
the computer screen, is a focusing tool, not a storage place. 
You can think about only two or three things at once. But 
the incomplete items are still being stored in the short- 
term-memory space. And as with RAM, there’s limited 
capacity; there’s only so much stuff you can store in there 
and still have that part of your brain function at a high level. 
Most people walk around with their RAM bursting at the 
seams. They’re constantly distracted, their focus disturbed 
and performance diminished by their own internal mental 


overload. Recent research in the cognitive sciences has now 
validated this conclusion. Studies have demonstrated that 
our mental processes are hampered by the burden put on 
the mind to keep track of things we’re committed to finish, 
without a trusted plan or system in place to handle them.+ 

For example, in the past few minutes, has your mind 
wandered off into some area that doesn’t have anything to 
do with what you’re reading here? Probably. And most likely 
where your mind went was to some open loop, some 
incomplete situation that you have an investment in. That 
situation merely reared up out of the RAM part of your 
brain and yelled at you internally. And what did you do 
about it? Unless you wrote it down and put it in a trusted 
collection tool that you know you'll review appropriately 
sometime soon, more than likely you worried, or at least 
reinforced some unresolved tension, about it. Not the most 
effective behavior: no progress was made, and stress 
increased. 

A big problem is that your mind keeps reminding you of 
things when you can’t do anything about them. It has no 
sense of past or future. That means as soon as you tell 
yourself that you might need to do something, and store it 
only in your head, there’s a part of you that thinks you 
should be doing that something all the time. Everything 
you’ve told yourself you ought to do, it thinks you should be 
doing right now. Frankly, as soon as you have two things to 
do stored only in your mind, you’ve generated personal 
failure, because you can’t do them both at the same time. 
This produces a pervasive stress factor whose source can’t 
be pinpointed. 


It is hard to fight an enemy who has outposts in your head. 


—Sally Kempton 


Most people have been in some version of this mental 
stress state so consistently, for so long, that they don’t even 
know they’re in it. Like gravity, it’s ever present—so much 
so that those who experience it usually aren’t even aware of 
the pressure. The only time most of them will realize how 
much tension they’ve been under is when they get rid of it 
and notice how different they feel. It’s like the constant 
buzzing noise in a room you didn’t know was there until it 
stops. 

Can you get rid of that kind of stress and noise? You bet. 
The rest of this book will explain how. 


Getting Control of Your Life: The 
Five Steps of Mastering Workflow 


Don’t let life get in your way. 


THE core Process for mastering the art of relaxed and controlled 
engagement is a five-step method for managing your 
workflow—the ever-present ingestion and expressions of 
our experiences. No matter what the setting, there are five 
discrete stages that we go through as we deal with our life, 
our work, and their consistent inputs and changes. Getting 
things under control, whether that’s in your kitchen or in 
your company, will incorporate them. And each of these 
separate aspects has its own best practices and tools, and 
must work together with the rest as a whole to produce 
that wonderfully productive state of being present amid all 
the complexity. It’s not simply about “getting organized” or 
“setting priorities.” Those are good things, but they happen 
as a result of applying these five steps—not by themselves. 
These procedures I will describe work together as a whole, 
and using them to produce results is both easier and more 
challenging than you may think. 


A useful definition of liberty is obtained only by seeking the principle 
of liberty in the main business of human life, that is to say, in the 


process by which men educate their responses and learn to control 
their environment. 


—Walter Lippmann 


We (1) capture what has our attention; (2) clarify what 
each item means and what to do about it; (3) organize the 
results, which presents the options we (4) reflect on, which 
we then choose to (5) engage with. This constitutes the 
management of the horizontal aspect of our lives, 
incorporating everything that we need to consider at any 
time, as we move forward moment to moment. 

These are not arbitrary or purely theoretical suggestions 
—they are what we all do, anytime we want to bring 
something under control and stabilize it for productive 
action. If you’re planning to cook dinner for friends, but you 
come home and find the kitchen a total mess, how do you 
get on top of it? First you identify all the stuff that doesn’t 
belong where it is, the way it is (capture); you then 
determine what to keep and what to throw away (clarify); 
you put things where they need to go—back in the 
refrigerator, in the garbage, or in the sink (organize); you 
then check your recipe book, along with the ingredients 
and utensils you have (reflect); and you get started by 
putting butter in the pan to start melting (engage). 

The method is straightforward enough in principle, and it 
is generally how we all go about our work in any case, but 
in my experience most people can significantly improve 
their handling of each one of the five steps. The quality of 
our workflow management is only as good as the weakest 
link in this five-phase chain, so all the links must be 
integrated and supported with consistent standards. 

Most people have had major inefficiencies in their 
versions of this control process in the larger contexts of life 
and work, but the stresses of our new world are blowing 
out the weak spots. The ubiquity of information access and 


rapidity of change happening, as you read this, consistently 
increase the complexity of your life and work. Only having 
to deal with a messy kitchen would be a relief! Small leaks, 
with added pressure, become big ones. One missed e-mail, 
untracked commitment, or decision avoided can have 
hugely magnified consequences. Because the volume of 
pertinent content is not diminishing or the input slowing 
down, avoiding getting a grip on the martial art of workflow 
mastery will be at your own peril. 

Most people have major weaknesses in their (1) capture 
process. Most of their commitments to do something are 
still in their head. The number of coulds, shoulds, might- 
want-tos, and ought-tos they generate in their minds are 
way Out beyond what they have recorded anywhere else. 

Many have collected lots of things but haven’t (2) 
clarified exactly what they represent or decided what 
action, if any, to take about them. Random lists strewn 
everywhere, meeting notes, vague to-dos on Post-its on 
their refrigerator or computer screens or in their Tasks 
function in a digital tool—all lie not acted on and numbing 
to the psyche in their effect. Those lists alone often create 
more stress than they relieve. 

Others make good decisions about stuff in the moment 
but lose the value of that thinking because they don’t 
efficiently (3) organize the results. They determined they 
should talk to their boss about something, but a reminder of 
that lies only in the dark recesses of their mind, unavailable 
in the appropriate context, in a trusted format, when they 
could use it. 

Still others have good systems but don’t (4) reflect on the 
contents consistently enough to keep them functional. They 
may have lists, plans, and various checklists available to 
them (created by capturing, clarifying, and organizing), but 
they don’t keep them current or access them to their 
advantage. Many people don’t look ahead at their own 
calendars consistently enough to stay current about 


upcoming events and deadlines, and they consequently 
become victims of last-minute craziness. 


Ask yourself, “When do I need to see what, in what form, to get it off 
my mind?” You build a system for function, not just to have a system. 


Finally, if any one of these previous links is weak, what 
someone is likely to choose to (5) engage in at any point in 
time may not be the best option. Most decisions for action 
and focus are driven by the latest and loudest inputs, and 
are based on hope instead of trust. People have a constant 
nagging sense that they’re not working on what they should 
be, that they “don’t have time” for potentially critical 
activities, and that they’re missing out on the timeless sense 
of meaningful doing that is the essence of stress-free 
productivity. 

The dynamics of these five steps need to be understood, 
and good techniques and tools implemented to facilitate 
their functioning at an optimal level. I have found it very 
helpful, if not essential, to separate these stages as I move 
through my day. There are times when I want only to collect 
input and not decide what to do with it yet. At other times I 
may just want to process my notes from a meeting. Or I may 
have just returned from a big trip and need to distribute 
and organize what I collected and processed on the road. 
Then there are times when I want to review the whole 
inventory of my work, or some portion of it. And obviously a 
lot of my time is spent merely doing something that I need 
to get done. 

I have discovered that one of the major reasons many 
people haven’t had a lot of success with getting organized is 
simply that they have tried to do all five steps at one time. 
Most, when they sit down to make a list, are trying to collect 
the “most important things” in some order that reflects 


priorities and sequences, without setting out many (or any) 
real actions to take. But if you don’t decide what needs to 
be done about your assistant’s birthday, because it’s “not 
that important” right now, that open loop will take up 
energy and prevent you from having a totally effective, 
clear focus on what’s important. 

This chapter explains the five steps in detail. Chapters 4 
through 8 provide a step-by-step program for implementing 
an airtight system for each phase, with lots of examples and 
best practices. 


Capture 


It’s important to know what needs to be captured and how 
to do that most effectively so you can process it 
appropriately. In order for your mind to let go of the lower- 
level task of trying to hang on to everything, you have to 
know that you have truly captured everything that might 
represent something you have to do or at least decide 
about, and that at some point in the near future you will 
process and review all of it. 


Gathering 100 Percent of the “Incompletes” 


In order to eliminate “holes in your bucket,” you need to 
collect and gather placeholders for, or representations of, 
all the things you consider incomplete in your world—that 
is, anything personal or professional, big or little, of urgent 
or minor importance, that you think ought to be different 
than it currently is and that you have any level of internal 
commitment to changing. 

Many of the things you have to do are being collected for 
you as you read this. Mail is coming into your various 


mailboxes—physical and virtual. You’re likely still getting 
packages and letters at home. Physical stuff is still landing 
in your in-tray at work, along with e-mail, texts, and voice 
mails into your digital tools. But at the same time, you’ve 
been capturing things in your environment and in your 
head that don’t belong where they are, the way they are, 
for all eternity. Even though it may not be as obviously “in 
your face” as your e-mail, the stuff still requires some kind 
of resolution—a loop to be closed, something to be done. 
Strategy ideas loitering in a notebook, “dead” gadgets in 
your desk drawers that need to be fixed or thrown away, 
and out-of-date magazines on your coffee table all fall into 
this category of stuff. 


A task left undone remains undone in two places—at the actual 
location of the task, and inside your head. Incomplete tasks in your 
head consume the energy of your attention as they gnaw at your 
conscience. 


—Brahma Kumaris 


As soon as you attach a “should,” “need to,” or “ought to” 
to an item, it becomes an incomplete. Decisions you still 
need to make about whether or not you are going to do 
something, for example, are already incompletes. This 
includes all of your I’m-going-tos, in which you’ve decided 
to do something but haven’t started moving on it yet. And it 
certainly includes all pending and in-progress items, as well 
as those things on which you’ve done everything you’re 
ever going to do except acknowledge that you’re finished 
with them. 

In order to manage this inventory of open loops 
appropriately, you need to capture it into “containers” that 
hold items in abeyance until you have a few moments to 
decide what they are and what, if anything, you’re going to 


do about them. Then you must empty these containers 
regularly to ensure that they remain viable capture tools. 

Basically, everything potentially meaningful to you is 
already being collected, in the larger sense. If it’s not being 
directly managed in a trusted external system of yours, 
then it’s resident somewhere in your mental space. The fact 
that you haven’t put an item in your in-tray doesn’t mean 
you haven’t got it. But we’re talking here about making 
sure everything you need is collected somewhere other 
than in your head. 


The Capture Tools 


There are several types of tools, both low- and high-tech, 
that can be used to collect your incompletes. The following 
can all serve as versions of an in-tray, capturing self- 
generated input as well as information from external 
sources: 


e Physical in-tray 

e Paper-based note-taking devices 
e Digital/audio note-taking devices 
e E-mail and text messaging 


The Physical In-Iray 


The standard plastic, wood, leather, or wire tray has for 
years been the most common tool for collecting paper- 
based and physical materials that need some sort of 
processing: mail, magazines, meeting notes, corporate 
reports, tickets, receipts, flash drives, business cards—even 
flashlights with dead batteries! 


Writing Paper and Pads 


Loose-leaf and bound notebooks, note cards, and paper 
pads of all shapes and sizes work fine for collecting random 
ideas, input, things to do, and so on. Whatever fits your 
taste and logistical needs. 


Digital and Voice Note Taking 


Computers, tablets, smartphones, and all kinds of new 
mobile tech gadgetry emerging daily can be used for 
capturing notes for later processing, preserving an interim 
record of things you need to remember to deal with. 


E-mail and Texting 


If you’re wired to the rest of the world through e-mail and 
texting, your software contains some sort of holding area 
for incoming messages and files, where they can be stored 
until they are viewed, read, and processed. 


Technology Integration 


The evolution of the digital world has made it increasingly 
possible to integrate these various channels automatically. 
Written notes from paper and whiteboards can be instantly 
recorded, recognized, and funneled into software storage. 
Voice messages can be recorded, digitized, and printed out. 
You can text an idea to your e-mail from your mobile device. 
Whether high-tech or low-tech, all of the tools and 
functions I’ve described serve similarly as in-trays, 
capturing potentially meaningful information, 
commitments, ideas, and agreements for action. 


The Success Factors for Capturing 


Unfortunately, merely having an in-tray doesn’t make it 
functional. Most people do have collection devices of some 
sort, but usually they’re more or less out of control or 
seriously underutilized. Let’s examine the three 
requirements to make the capturing phase work: 


Get It All Out of Your Head 


Get a purge for your brain. It will do better than for your stomach. 


—Michel Eyquem de Montaigne 


If you’re still trying to keep track of too many things in your 
mental space, you likely won’t be motivated to use and 
empty your in-trays with integrity. Most people are 
relatively careless about these tools because they know 
they don’t represent discrete, whole systems anyway; 
there’s an incomplete set of things in their in-tray and an 
incomplete set in their mind, and they’re not getting a real 
payoff from either one, so their thinking goes. It’s like 
trying to play pinball on a machine that has big holes in the 
table, so the balls keep falling out: there’s little motivation 
to keep playing the game. 


Keep everything /n your head or out of your head. If it’s in between, 
you won’t trust either one. 


These collection tools should become part of your 
lifestyle. Keep them close by so no matter where you are 
you can collect a potentially valuable thought—think of 
them as being as indispensable as your toothbrush or your 
driver’s license or your glasses. The sense of trust that 


nothing possibly useful will get lost will give you the 
freedom to have many more good ideas. 


Minimize the Number of Capture Locations 


You should have as many in-trays as you need and as few as 
you can get by with. You need this function to be available 
to you in every context, since things you'll want to capture 
may show up almost anywhere. If you have too many 
collection zones, however, you won’t be able to process 
them easily or consistently. 


Funnel all potentially meaningful inputs through minimal channels, 
directed to you for easily accessed review and assessment about their 
nature. 


An excess of collection buckets can easily happen in both 
the low-tech and hi-tech arenas. There is a real 
improvement opportunity for most people on the low-tech 
side, primarily in the areas of note taking and physical in- 
tray collection. Written notes need to be corralled and 
processed instead of left lying embedded in stacks, 
notebooks, and drawers. Paper and physical materials need 
to be funneled into physical in-trays instead of being 
scattered over myriad piles in all the available corners of 
the world. On the high-tech side, potential sources of input 
for stuff to be assessed and processed have proliferated 
tremendously, with the advent of social media, multiple 
connected devices, and the ubiquity of e-mail. People now 
often have more than one e-mail account, are participating 
in at least one if not several social media worlds, and 
operate with numerous digital devices. Paradoxically, the 
tendency to accumulate a huge backlog of random inputs to 
deal with, and the number of people troubled with that, 


have increased dramatically, as the digital revolution has 
“streamlined” our lives. 

Implementing standard tools and procedures for 
capturing ideas and input will become more and more 
critical as your life and work become more sophisticated. As 
you proceed in your career, for instance, you'll probably 
notice that your best ideas about work will not come to you 
at work. The ability to leverage that thinking with good 
collection devices that are always at hand is key to staying 
on top of your world. 


Empty the Capture Tools Regularly 


The final success factor for capturing should be obvious: if 
you don’t empty and process the stuff you’ve collected, your 
tools aren’t serving any function other than the storage of 
amorphous material. Emptying the contents does not mean 
that you have to finish what’s there; it just means that you 
have to decide more specifically what it is and what should 
be done with it, and if it’s still unfinished, organize it into 
your system. You must get it out of the container. You don’t 
leave it or put it back into “in”! Not emptying your in-tray is 
like having garbage cans and mailboxes that no one ever 
dumps or deals with—you just have to keep buying new 
ones to hold an eternally accumulating volume. 


Blockage in the flow of anything undermines the ability to be present, 
fresh, and creative in that arena. 


In order to get “in” to empty, however, an integrated life- 
management system must be in place. Too much stuff is left 
piled in in-trays (physical and digital) because of a lack of 
effective systems “downstream” from there. It often seems 
easier to leave things in “in” when you know you have to do 


something about them but can’t do it right then. The in-tray, 
especially for paper and e-mail, is the best that many people 
can do in terms of organization—at least they know that 
somewhere in there is a reminder of something they still 
have to do. Unfortunately, that safety net is lost when the 
piles get out of control or the inventory of e-mails gets too 
extensive to be viewed on one screen. 

When you master the next two steps and know how to 
process and organize your inputs and incompletes easily 
and rapidly, “in” can return to its original function. Let’s 
move on to how to get those in-trays and e-mail systems 
empty without necessarily having to do the work now. 


Clarify 


Teaching them the item-by-item thinking required to get 
their collection containers empty is perhaps the most 
critical improvement I have made for virtually all the people 
I’ve worked with. When the head of a major department in 
a global corporation had finished processing all her open 
items with me, she sat back in awe and told me that though 
she had been able to relax about what meetings to go to 
thanks to her trust in her calendar, she had never felt that 
same relief about all the many other aspects of her job, 
which we had just clarified together. The actions and 
information she needed to be reminded of were now 
identified and entrusted to a concrete system. 


It is better to be wrong than to be vague. 


—Freeman Dyson 


What do you need to ask yourself (and answer) about 
each e-mail, text, voice mail, memo, page of meeting notes, 
or self-generated idea that comes your way? This is the 
component of input management that forms the basis for 
your personal organization. Many people try to get 
organized but make the mistake of doing it with incomplete 
batches of stuff. You can’t organize what’s incoming—you 
can only capture it and process it. Instead, you organize the 
actions you'll need to take based on the decisions you’ve 
made about what needs to be done. The whole deal—both 
the capturing and organizing phases—is represented in the 
center “trunk” of the decision-tree model shown here. 


What Is It? 


This is not a dumb question. We’ve talked about stuff. And 
we’ve talked about collection buckets. But we haven’t 
discussed what stuff is and what to do about it. For 
example, many of the items that tend to leak out of our 
personal organizing systems are amorphous forms that we 
receive from the government or from our company—do we 
actually need to do something about them? And what about 
that e-mail from human resources, letting us know that 
blah-blah about the blah-blah is now the policy of blah-blah? 
I’ve unearthed piles of messages in stacks and desk 
drawers that were tossed there because the client didn’t 
take just a few seconds to figure out what, in fact, the 
communication or document was really about. Which is why 
the next decision is critical. 


“stuff ” 
Vv 


In-basket 
“C= 
What is it? 


Someday/ 





for review} 


4 aati 7 maybe 
Ret actionable >» no {tickler hold 
Vv 











Multistep '_»| Reference 

Projects projects { {retrievable 

{planning} Pw whien required} 
What's the inated 

v en next action? 

{review for actions} Will it take less than 2 minutes? 


{ | 


yes no 


: 


| doit | it Delegate it | it | Deterit | | Deterit | 
Waiting Calendar Next actions 
{for someone else to do} {to do at a specific time} } | {to do as soon as | can} 


Project plans 
































WORKFLOW DIAGRAM—PROCESSING 


Is It Actionable? 


There are two possible answers for this: yes and no. 


No Action Required If the answer is no, there are three 
possibilities: 

These three categories can themselves be managed; 
we'll get into that in a later chapter. For now, suffice it to 
say that you need a wastebasket and < Del> key for trash, a 
“tickler” file or calendar for material that’s incubating, and 
a good filing system for reference information. 


Actionable This is the yes group of items, stuff about which 
something needs to be done. Typical examples range from 
an e-mail requesting a summary of the speech you’ve 
agreed to give at a luncheon to the notes in your in-tray 
from your face-to-face meeting with the group vice 
president about a significant new project that involves 
hiring an outside consultant. 

Two things need to be determined about each actionable 
item: 


It does not take much strength to do things, but it requires a great 
deal of strength to decide what to do. 


—Elbert Hubbard 


If It’s About a Project... You need to capture that outcome 
on a “Projects” list. That will be the stake in the ground that 
will keep reminding you that you have an open loop until it 
is finished. A Weekly Review of the list (see page 50) will 
bring this item back to you as something that’s still 
outstanding. It will stay fresh and alive in your management 


system (versus your head) until it is completed or 
eliminated. 


What’s the Next Action? This is the critical question for 
anything you’ve captured; if you answer it appropriately, 
you'll have the key substantive thing to organize. The “next 
action” is the next physical, visible activity that needs to be 
engaged in, in order to move the current reality of this 
thing toward completion. 

Some examples of next actions might be: 


e Call Fred re: name and number of the repair shop he 
mentioned. 

e Draft thoughts for the budget-meeting agenda. 

e Talk to Angela about the filing system we need to set up. 

e Research Internet for local watercolor classes. 


These are all real physical activities that need to happen. 
Reminders of these will become the primary grist for the 
mill of your personal productivity-management system. 


Do It, Delegate It, or Defer It Once you’ve decided on the 
next action, you have three options: 

1. Do it. If an action will take less than two minutes, it 
should be done at the moment it is defined. 

2. Delegate it. If the action will take longer than two 
minutes, ask yourself, Am I the right person to do this? If 
the answer is no, delegate it to the appropriate entity. 

3. Defer it, If the action will take longer than two 
minutes, and you are the right person to do it, you will have 
to defer acting on it until later and track it on one or more 
“Next Actions” lists. 


Organize 


Being organized means simply that where something is matches what 
it means to you. 


The outer ring of the workflow diagram shows the eight 
discrete categories of reminders and materials that will 
result from your processing all your stuff. Together they 
make up a total system for organizing just about everything 
that’s on your plate, or could be added to it, on a daily and 
weekly basis. 

For nonactionable items, the possible categories are 
trash, incubation, and reference. If no action is needed on 
something, you toss it, “tickle” it for later reassessment, or 
file it so you can find the material if you need to refer to it at 
another time. To manage actionable things, you will need a 
list of projects, storage or files for project plans and 
materials, a calendar, a list of reminders of next actions, 
and a list of reminders of things you're waiting for. 

All of the organizational categories need to be physically 
contained in some form. When I refer to “lists,” I just mean 
some sort of reviewable set of reminders, which could be 
lists on notebook paper or in some computer program or 
even file folders holding separate pieces of paper for each 
item. For instance, the list of current projects could be kept 
on a page in a loose-leaf planner; it could be held ina 
category within the Tasks function of a software application; 
or it could be in a simple physical file folder labeled 
“Projects List.” Incubating reminders (such as “After 01 
March contact my accountant to set up a meeting”) may be 
stored in a paper-based “tickler” or “bring-forward” file or 
in a digital calendar application. 


“stuf 9 
Vv 




















In-basket 
I 
What is it? 
| Someday/ 
| | maybe 
Is it actionable? | >» 1lO {tickler hold 








for review} 





Reference 


Vv 
. Multistep | 
Projects projects } (retrievable 
{planning} 


oe What’s the when required} 
| , 








next action? 








Project plans 


Vv 
{review for actions} Will it take less than 2 minutes? 








yes no 


: ! | : 


Do it Delegate it Defer it 


Waiting Calendar Next actions 
{for someone else to do} {to do at a specific time} } { {to do as soon as | can} 








WORKFLOW DIAGRAM— ORGANIZING 


Projects 


I define a project as any desired result that can be 
accomplished within a year that requires more than one 
action step. This means that some rather small things you 
might not normally call projects are going to be on your 
Projects list, as well as some big ones. The reasoning behind 
my definition is that if one step won’t complete something, 
some kind of goalpost needs to be set up to remind you that 
there’s something still left to do. If you don’t have a 
placeholder to remind you about it, it will slip back into your 
head. The reason for the one-year time frame is that 
anything you are committed to finish within that scope 
needs to be reviewed weekly to feel comfortable about its 
status. Another way to think of this is as a list of open loops, 
no matter what the size. 


A Partial Projects List 

Get new staff person on board 

Take August holiday 

Produce staff off-site retreat 

Publish book 

Finalize computer upgrades 

Update will 

Finalize budgets 

Finalize new product offering 

Learn new CRM software 

Get reprints of HBR article 

Get a publicist 

Plant spring garden 

Research resources for video project 
Establish next year’s conference schedule 
Finalize employment agreements 
Install new porch lighting 

Get a new kitchen table 

Enroll Maria in middle school 


Projects do not initially need to be listed in any particular 
order, by size, or by priority. They just need to be ona 


master list so you can review them regularly enough to 
ensure that appropriate next actions have been defined for 
each of them. 

You don’t actually do a project; you can only do action 
steps related to it. When enough of the right action steps 
have been taken, some situation will have been created that 
matches your initial picture of the outcome closely enough 
that you can call it “done.” The list of projects is the 
compilation of finish lines we put before us to keep our next 
actions moving on all tracks appropriately. 

There may be reasons to sort your projects into different 
subcategories, based upon different areas of your focus, but 
initially creating a single list of all of them will make it 
easier to customize your system appropriately as you get 
more comfortable with its usage. 


Project Support Material 


For many of your projects, you will accumulate relevant 
information that you will want to organize by theme or topic 
or project name. Your Projects list will be merely an index. 
All of the details, plans, and supporting information that you 
may need as you work on your various projects should be 
contained in separate file folders, computer files, 
notebooks, or binders. 


Support Materials and Reference Files Once you have 
organized your project support material by theme or topic, 
you will probably find that it is almost identical to your 
reference material and could be kept in the same reference 
file system (a Wedding file could be kept in the general- 
reference files, for instance). The only difference is that in 
the case of active projects, support material may need to be 
reviewed on a more consistent basis to ensure that all the 
necessary action steps are identified. 


I usually recommend that people store their support 
materials out of sight. If you have a good working reference 
file system close enough at hand, you may find that that’s 
the simplest way to organize them. There will be times, 
though, when it’ll be more convenient to have the materials 
out and instantly in view and available, especially if you’re 
working on a hot project that you need to check references 
for several times during the day. File folders in wire 
standing holders or in stackable trays within easy reach can 
be practical for this kind of pending paperwork. 

The digital world has paradoxically made organizing 
reference and support materials simultaneously simpler 
and more complex. It’s quick and easy to capture something 
from somewhere and copy it somewhere else, but deciding 
where it goes can be daunting, given the plethora of 
parking places available to us and the myriad ways that we 
might want the information available to others as well as 
ourselves. The best practice is to keep your digital 
reference world as simple as possible, and consistently 
reviewed and purged. 


The Next-Action Categories 


As the workflow diagram makes clear, the next-action 
decision is central. That action needs to be the next 
physical, visible behavior, without exception, on every open 
loop. 

Any less-than-two-minute actions that you perform, and 
all other actions that have already been completed, do not, 
of course, need to be tracked; they’re done. What does 
need to be tracked is every action that has to happen ata 
specific time or on a specific day (enter those on your 
calendar); those that need to be done as soon as they can 
(add these to your Next Actions lists); and all those that you 
are waiting for others to do (put these on a Waiting For list). 


Calendar 


Reminders of actions you need to take fall into two 
categories: those about things that have to happen ona 
specific day or time, and those about things that just need 
to get done as soon as possible. Your calendar handles the 
first type of reminder. 

Three things go on your calendar: 


e time-specific actions; 
e day-specific actions; and 
e day-specific information 


Time-Specific Actions This is a fancy name for 
appointments. Often the next action to be taken ona 
project is attending a meeting that has been set up to 
discuss it. Simply tracking that on the calendar is sufficient. 


Day-Specific Actions These are things that you need to do 
sometime on a certain day, but not necessarily at a specific 
time. Perhaps you told Mioko you would call her on Friday 
to check that the report you’re sending her is OK. She 
won't have the report until Thursday, and she’s leaving the 
country on Saturday, so Friday is the time window for 
taking the action—but anytime Friday will be fine. That 
should be tracked on the calendar for Friday but not tied to 
any particular time slot—it should just go on the day. It’s 
useful to have a calendar on which you can note both time- 
specific and day-specific actions. 


Day-Specific Information The calendar is also the place to 
keep track of things you want to know about on specific 
days—not necessarily actions you'll have to take but rather 
information that may be useful on a certain date. This might 
include directions for appointments, activities that other 
people (family or staff) will be involved in then, or events of 


interest. It’s helpful to put short-term tickler information 
here, too, such as a reminder to call someone after he or 
she returns from vacation. This is also where you would 
want to park important reminders about when something 
might be due, or when something needs to be started (in 
case it hasn’t been yet), given a determined lead time. 


Blessed are the flexible, for they shall not be bent out of shape. 
—Michael McGriffy, M.D. 


No More “Daily To-Do” Lists on the Calendar Those three 
things are what go on the calendar, and nothing else! This 
might be heresy to past-century time-management training, 
which almost universally taught that the daily to-do list is 
key. But such lists embedded on a calendar don’t work, for 
two reasons. 

First, constant new input and shifting tactical priorities 
reconfigure daily work so consistently that it’s virtually 
impossible to nail down to-do items ahead of time. Having a 
working game plan as a reference point is always useful, 
but it must be able to be renegotiated at any moment. 
Trying to keep a list on the calendar, which must then be 
reentered on another day if items don’t get done, is 
demoralizing and a waste of time. The Next Actions lists I 
advocate will hold all of those action reminders, even the 
most time-sensitive ones. And they won’t have to be 
rewritten daily. 

Second, if there’s something on a daily to-do list that 
doesn’t absolutely have to get done that day, it will dilute 
the emphasis on the things that truly do. If I have to call 
Mioko on Friday because that’s the only day I can reach 
her, but then I add five other, less important or less time- 
sensitive calls to my to-do list, when the day gets crazy I 
may never call Mioko. My brain will have to take back the 


reminder that that’s the one phone call I won’t get another 
chance at. That’s not utilizing the system appropriately. The 
way I look at it, the calendar should be sacred territory. If 
you write something there, it must get done that day or not 
at all. The only rewriting should be for changed 
appointments. 

That said, there’s absolutely nothing wrong with creating 
a quick, informal, short list of “if I have time, I’d really like 
to...” kinds of things, picked from your Next Actions 
inventory. It just should not be confused with your “have- 
tos,” and it should be treated lightly enough to discard or 
change quickly as the inevitable surprises of the day unfold. 


The “Next Actions” List(s) 


So where do your entire action reminders go? On Next 
Actions lists, which, along with the calendar, are at the 
heart of daily action-management organization and 
orientation. 

Any longer-than-two-minute, non-delegatable action you 
have identified needs to be tracked somewhere. “Call Jim 
Smith re: budget meeting,” “E-mail family update to 
friends,” and “Draft ideas re: the annual sales conference” 
are all the kinds of action reminders that need to be kept in 
appropriate lists, to be assessed as options for what we will 
do at any point in time. 


Everything should be made as simple as possible, but no simpler. 


—Albert Einstein 


If you have only twenty or thirty of these, it may be fine 
to keep them all on one list labeled “Next Actions,” which 
you'll review whenever you have any free time. For most of 
us, however, the number is more likely to be fifty to 150. In 


that case it makes sense to subdivide your Next Actions list 
into categories, such as Calls to make when you have a 
window of time and your phone, or Computer action items 
to see as options when you’re at that device. 


Nonactionable Items 


You need well-organized, discrete systems to handle things 
that require no action as well as those that do. No-action 
systems fall into three categories: trash, incubation, and 
reference. 


Trash 


Trash should be self-evident. Throw away, shred, or recycle 
anything that has no potential future action or reference 
value. If you leave this stuff mixed in with other categories, 
it will seriously undermine the system and your clarity in 
the environment. 


Incubation 


There are two other groups of things besides trash that 
require no immediate action but that you will want to keep. 
Here, again, it’s critical that you separate nonactionable 
from actionable items; otherwise you will tend to go numb 
to your piles, stacks, and lists and not know where to start 
or what needs to be done. 

Say you read something in a newsletter that gives you an 
idea for a project you might want to do someday, but not 
now. You'll want to be reminded of it again later so you can 
reassess the option of doing something about it in the 
future. Or you get a notice about the upcoming season of 
your local symphony, and you see that the program that 


really interests you is still four months away—too distant for 
you to move on it yet (you’re not sure what your travel 
schedule will be that far out). But if you are in town, you’d 
like to go. What should you do about that? 

There are two kinds of incubation tools that could work 
for this kind of thing: Someday/Maybe lists and a tickler 
system. 


Someday/Maybe It can be useful and inspiring to maintain 
an ongoing list of things you might want to do at some point 
but not now. This is the “parking lot” for projects that would 
be impossible to move on at present but that you don’t want 
to forget about entirely. You’d like to be reminded of the 
possibility at regular intervals. 


Typical Partial Someday/Maybe List 
Get a sailboat 

Learn Spanish 

Take a watercolor class 
Renovate the kitchen 

Build a lap pool 

Take a balloon ride 

Build a wine cellar 

Spend a month in Tuscany 
Create my own Web page 
Set up a foundation for kids 
Get a piano 

Publish my memoir 

Get scuba certification 
Learn to tango 

Learn to throw pottery 

Give a neighborhood party 
Build a koi pond 


These items are of the nature of “projects I might want to 
do, but not now... but I’d like to be reminded of them 
regularly.” You must review this list periodically if you’re 
going to get the most value from it. I suggest you include a 
scan of the contents in your Weekly Review (see page 50). 


You'll probably have some other types of information that 
are similar to Someday/Maybe but that probably need a 
review only when you have an urge to engage ina 
particular kind of activity. These would be lists such as: 


Books to read 

Wines to taste 

Recipes to try 

Movies to rent 

Weekend trips to take 

Things my kids might like to do 
Seminars to take 

Web sites to surf 


These kinds of reminders can greatly expand your 
options for creative exploration. Having an organizational 
tool that allows you to easily make lists such as these, ad 
hoc, is quite worthwhile. 


Tickler System A second type of things to incubate are 
those you don’t want or need to be reminded of until some 
designated time in the future. A most elegant version of 
holding for review of this nature is the tickler file, 
sometimes also referred to as a “Suspense,” “follow-on,” or 
“perpetual” file. This is a system that allows you to almost 
literally mail something to yourself, for receipt on some 
designated date in the future. 

Your calendar can serve the same function. You might 
remind yourself on your calendar for March 15, for 
example, that your taxes are due in a month; or for 
September 12, that Swan Lake will be presented by the 
Bolshoi at the Civic Auditorium in six weeks. 

For further details, refer to chapter 7. 


Reference Material 


Many things that come your way require no action but have 
intrinsic value as information. You will want to keep and be 
able to retrieve these as needed. They can be stored in 
paper-based or digital form. 

Paper-based material—anything from the menu for a 
local takeout deli to the plans, drawings, and vendor 
information for a landscape project—is best stored in 
efficient physical or digital retrieval systems. These can 
range from pages in a loose-leaf planner or notebook, for a 
list of favorite restaurants or the phone numbers of 
members of a school committee, to whole file cabinets 
dedicated to the due-diligence paperwork for a corporate 
merger. Though more and more information is showing up 
in digital form, print versions are at times still an effective 
way for it to be stored and reviewed. 

Electronic storage can include everything from cloud- 
based data storage to archive folders in your 
communications software. 

The most important thing to remember here is that 
reference should be exactly that—information that can be 
easily referred to when required. Reference systems 
generally take two forms: (1) topic- and area-specific 
storage, and (2) general-reference files. The first types 
usually define themselves in terms of how they are stored— 
for example, a file drawer dedicated to contracts, by date; a 
drawer containing only confidential employee- 
compensation information; a series of cabinets for closed 
legal cases that might need to be consulted for future trials; 
or a customer relations management (CRM) database for 
client and prospect histories. 


General Reference Filing The second type of reference 
system is one that everyone needs close at hand for storing 
ad hoc information that doesn’t belong in some predesigned 
larger category. You need somewhere to keep the 
instruction manuals for your kitchenware, the handwritten 


notes from your meeting about the Smith project, and those 
yen you didn’t get to exchange at the end of your most 
recent trip to Tokyo (and that you can use when you go 
back there). 

The lack of a good general-reference file can be one of 
the biggest bottlenecks in implementing an efficient 
personal management system. If filing and storing isn’t easy 
and fast (and even fun!), you’ll tend to stack, pile, or 
digitally accumulate things instead of putting them away 
appropriately. If your reference material doesn’t have nice 
clean edges to it, the line between actionable and 
nonactionable items will blur, visually and psychologically, 
and your mind will go numb to the whole business. 
Establishing a good working system for this category of 
material is critical to ensuring stress-free productivity; we 
will explore it in detail in chapter 7. 


Reflect 


It’s one thing to write down that you need milk; it’s another 
to be at the store and remember it. Likewise, writing down 
that you need to call a friend to find out how he’s doing 
after a significant event in his life and wish him well is 
different from remembering it when you’re at a phone and 
have some discretionary time. 

You need to be able to step back and review the whole 
picture of your life and work from a broader perspective as 
well as drop down “into the weeds” of concrete actions to 
take, as needed, and at appropriate intervals. For most 
people the magic of workflow management is realized in 
the consistent use of the reflection step. This is where, in 
one important case, you take a look at all your outstanding 
projects and open loops, at what I call Horizon 1 level (see 
page 55), on a weekly basis. It’s your chance to scan all the 


defined actions and options before you, thus radically 
increasing the efficacy of the choices you make about what 
you’re doing at any point in time. 

Your life is more complex than any single system can 
describe or coordinate, but the GTD methodology creates a 
coherent model for placeholding key elements, which still 
require attention, being kept current, and being reviewed 
in a coordinated way. Most people have some simple 
components of this in various places, but the contents and 
the utilization of these are elementary, at best. 


What to Review When 


If you set up a personal organization system structured as I 
recommend, with a Projects list, a calendar, Next Actions 
lists, and a Waiting For list, not much will be required to 
maintain that system. 

The item you'll probably review most frequently is your 
calendar, which will remind you about the “hard landscape” 
for the day—that is, what things truly have to be handled 
that day. This doesn’t mean that the contents there are the 
most “important” in some grand sense—only that they must 
get done. At any point in time, knowing what has to get 
done and when creates a terrain for maneuvering. It’s a 
good habit, as soon as you conclude an action on your 
calendar (a meeting, a phone call, the final draft of a report 
that’s due), to check and see what else remains to be done. 


Review whatever lists, overviews, and orientation maps you need to, 
as often as you need to, to get their contents off your mind. 


After checking your calendar, you'll most often turn to 
your Next Action lists. These hold the inventory of 


predefined actions that you can take if you have any 
discretionary time during the day. If you’ve organized them 
by context (At Home; At Computer; In Meeting with 
George) they’ll come into play only when those contexts are 
available. 

Projects, Waiting For, and Someday/Maybe lists need to 
be reviewed only as often as you think they have to be in 
order to stop you from wondering about them. 


Critical Success Factor: The Weekly Review 


The affairs of life embrace a multitude of interest, and he who reasons 
in any one of them, without consulting the rest, is a visionary unsuited 
to control the business of the world. 


—James Fenimore Cooper 


Everything that might require action must be reviewed on a 
frequent enough basis to keep your mind from taking back 
the job of remembering and reminding. In order to trust 
the rapid and intuitive judgment calls that you make about 
actions from moment to moment, you must consistently 
retrench at some more elevated level. In my experience 
(with thousands of people), that translates into a behavior 
critical for success: the Weekly Review. 

All of your Projects, active project plans, and Next 
Actions, Agendas, Waiting For, and even Someday/Maybe 
lists should be reviewed once a week. This also gives you an 
opportunity to ensure that your brain is clear and that all 
the loose strands of the past few days have been captured, 
Clarified, and organized. 

If you’re like most people, you’ve found that things can 
get relatively out of control during the course of a few days 
of operational intensity. That’s to be expected, but it will 


continue to increase in tandem with the ubiquity of your 
always-on, connected world. You wouldn’t want to distract 
yourself from too much of the work at hand in an effort to 
stay totally “squeaky clean” all the time. But in order to 
afford the luxury of “getting on a roll” with confidence, 
you'll probably need to clean house and refresh the 
contents once a week. 

The Weekly Review is the time to: 


Gather and process all your stuff. 
Review your system. 

Update your lists. 

Get clean, clear, current, and complete. 


You have to use your mind to get things off your mind. 


Most people don’t have a really complete system, and 
they get no real payoff from reviewing things for just that 
reason: their overview isn’t total. They still have a vague 
sense that something may be missing. That’s why the 
rewards to be gained from implementing this whole process 
are exponential: the more complete the system is, the more 
you'll trust it. And the more you trust it, the more complete 
you'll be motivated to keep it. The Weekly Review is a 
master key to maintaining that standard. 

Most people feel best about their work the week before 
they go on vacation, but it’s not because of the vacation 
itself What do you do the last week before you leave on a 
big trip? You clean up, close up, clarify, organize, and 
renegotiate all your agreements with yourself and others. 
You do this so you can relax and be present on the beach, 
on the golf course, or on the slopes, with nothing else on 
your mind. I suggest you do this weekly instead of yearly, so 


you can bring this kind of “being present” to your everyday 
life. 


Engage 


The basic purpose of this workflow-management process is 
to facilitate good choices about what you’re doing at any 
point in time. At 10:33 a.m. Monday, deciding whether to 
call Sandy, finish the proposal, or clean up your e-mails will 
always be an intuitive call, but with the proper orientation 
you can feel much more confident about your choices. You 
can move from hope to trust in your actions, immediately 
increasing your energy and effectiveness. 


Every decision to act is an intuitive one. The challenge is to migrate 
from hoping it’s the right choice to trusting it’s the right choice. 


Three Models for Making Action Choices 


Let’s assume for a moment that you’re not resisting any of 
your stuff out of insecurity or procrastination. There will 
always be a long list of actions that you are not doing at any 
given moment. So how will you decide what to do and what 
not to do, and feel good about both? 

The answer is, by trusting your intuition. If you have 
captured, clarified, organized, and reflected on all your 
current commitments, you can galvanize your intuitive 
judgment with some intelligent and practical thinking about 
your work and values. 

There are three models that will be helpful for you to 
incorporate in your decision making about what to do. They 
won’t tell you answers—whether you call Mario, e-mail your 


son at school, or just have an informal conversation with 
your secretary—but they will assist you in framing your 
options more intelligently. And that’s something that the 
simple time- and priority-management panaceas can’t do. 


1. The Four-Criteria Model for Choosing Actions in 
the Moment 


At 3:22 on Wednesday, how do you choose what to do? At 
that moment there are four criteria you can apply, in this 
order: context, time available, energy available, and 
priority. 

The first three describe the constraints within which you 
continually operate, and the fourth provides the 
hierarchical values to ascribe to your actions. 


Context You are always constrained by what you have the 
capability to do at this time. A few actions can be done 
anywhere (such as drafting ideas about a project with pen 
and paper), but most require a specific location (at home, at 
your office) or having some productivity tool at hand, such 
as a phone or a computer. These are the first factors that 
limit your choices about what you can do in the moment. 


There is always more to do than you can do, and you can do only one 
thing at a time. The key is to feel as good about what you’re not doing 
as about what you are doing at that moment. 


Time Available When do you have to do something else? 
Having a meeting in five minutes would prevent doing any 
actions that require more time. 


Energy Available How much energy do you have? Some 
actions you have to do require a reservoir of fresh, creative 


mental energy. Others need more physical horsepower. 
Some need very little of either. 


Priority Given your context, time, and energy available, 
what action remaining of your options will give you the 
highest payoff? You’re in your office with a phone and a 
computer, you have an hour, and your energy is 7.3 ona 
scale of 10. Should you call the client back, work on the 
proposal, process your e-mails, or check in with your spouse 
to see how his or her day is going? 

This is where you need to access your intuition and begin 
to rely on your judgment call in the moment. To explore that 
concept further, let’s examine two more models for deciding 
what’s most important for you to be doing. 


2. The Threefold Model for Identifying Daily Work 


When you’re getting things done, or “working” in the 
universal sense, there are three different kinds of activities 
you can be engaged in: 


e Doing predefined work 
e Doing work as it shows up 
e Defining your work 


Doing Predefined Work When you're doing predefined 
work, you’re working from your Next Actions lists and 
calendar—completing tasks that you have previously 
determined need to be done, or managing your workflow. 
You’re making the calls you need to make, drafting ideas 
you want to brainstorm, attending meetings, or preparing a 
list of things to talk to your attorney about. 


Doing Work as It Shows Up Often things come up ad hoc— 
unsuspected, unforeseen—that you either have to or choose 
to engage in as they occur. For example, your partner walks 


into your office and wants to have a conversation about the 
new product launch, so you talk to her instead of doing all 
the other things you could be doing. Every day brings 
surprises—unplanned-for things that just show up—and 
you'll need to expend at least some time and energy on 
many of them. When you follow these leads, you’re deciding 
by default that these things are more important than 
anything else you have to do at those times. 


Defining Your Work Defining your work entails clearing up 
your in-tray, your digital messages, and your meeting notes, 
and breaking down new projects into actionable steps. As 
you process your inputs, you'll no doubt be taking care of 
some less-than-two-minute actions and tossing and filing 
numerous things (another version of doing work as it shows 
up). A good portion of this activity will consist of identifying 
things that need to get done sometime, but not right away. 
You'll be adding to all of your lists as you go along. 

Once you have defined all your work, you can trust that 
your lists of things to do are complete. And your context, 
time, and energy available still allow you the option of more 
than one thing to do. The final thing to consider is the 
nature of your work, and its goals and standards. 


3. The Six-Level Model for Reviewing Your Own Work 


Priorities should drive your choices, but most models for 
determining them are not reliable tools for much of our real 
work activity. In order to know what your priorities are, you 
have to know what your work is. And there are at least six 
different perspectives from which to define that. To use an 
appropriate analogy, the conversation has a lot do with the 
horizon, or distance of perception. Looking out from a 
building, you will notice different things from different 
floors. 


e Horizon 5: Purpose and principles 

e Horizon 4: Vision 

e Horizon 3: Goals 

e Horizon 2: Areas of focus and accountabilities 
e Horizon 1: Current projects 

e Ground: Current actions 


Let’s start from the bottom up: 


Ground: Current Actions This is the accumulated list of all 
the actions you need to take—all the phone calls you have to 
make, the e-mails you have to respond to, the errands 
you’ve got to run, and the agendas you want to 
communicate to your boss and your life partner. You’d 
probably have more than a hundred of these items to 
handle if you stopped the world right now with no more 
input from yourself or anyone else. 


Horizon 1: Current Projects Generating most of the actions 
that you currently have in front of you are the thirty to one 
hundred projects on your plate. These are the relatively 
short-term outcomes you want to achieve, such as setting 
up a new home computer, organizing a sales conference, 
moving to a new headquarters, and getting a dentist. 


Complete the projects you begin, fulfill the commitments you have 
made, live up to your promises—then both your subconscious and 
conscious selves can have success, which leads to a feeling of 
fulfillment, worthiness and oneness. 


—John-Roger 


Horizon 2: Areas of Focus and Accountabilities You create 
or accept your projects and actions because of the roles, 
interests, and accountabilities you have. These are the key 
areas of your life and work within which you want to 


achieve results and maintain standards. Your job may entail 
at least implicit commitments for things like strategic 
planning, administrative support, staff development, market 
research, customer service, or asset management. And your 
personal life has an equal number of such focus arenas: 
health, family, finances, home environment, spirituality, 
recreation, etc. These are not things to finish but rather to 
use as criteria for assessing our experiences and our 
engagements, to maintain balance and sustainability, as we 
operate in our work and our world. Listing and reviewing 
these responsibilities gives a more comprehensive 
framework for evaluating your inventory of projects. 


Horizon 3: Goals What you want to be experiencing in 
various areas of your life and work one to two years from 
now will add another dimension to defining your work. 
Often meeting the goals and objectives of your job will 
require a shift in emphasis of your job focus, with new 
accountabilities emerging. At this horizon personally, too, 
there probably are things you'd like to accomplish or have 
in place, which could add importance to certain aspects of 
your life and diminish others. 


Horizon 4: Vision Projecting three to five years into the 
future generates thinking about bigger categories: 
organization strategies, environmental trends, career and 
lifestyle transition circumstances. Internal factors include 
longer-term career, family, financial, and quality-of-life 
aspirations and considerations. Outer-world issues could 
involve changes affecting your job and organization, such as 
technology, globalization, market trends, and competition. 
Decisions at this altitude could easily change what your 
work might look like on many levels. 


Horizon 5: Purpose and Principles This is the big-picture 
view. Why does your company exist? Why do you exist? 


What really matters to you, no matter what? The primary 
purpose for anything provides the core definition of what 
the work really is. It is the ultimate job description. All 
goals, visions, objectives, projects, and actions derive from 
this, and lead toward it. 

These horizon analogies are somewhat arbitrary, and in 
real life the important conversations you will have about 
your focus and your priorities may not exactly fit one level 
or another. They can provide a useful framework, however, 
to remind you of the multilayered nature of your 
commitments and tasks. 


Minute-to-minute and day-to-day you don’t have time to think. You 
need to have already thought. 


Obviously many factors must be considered before you 
feel comfortable that you have made the best decision 
about what to do and when. “Setting priorities” in the 
traditional sense of focusing on your long-term goals and 
values, though obviously a necessary core focus, does not 
provide a practical framework for a vast majority of the 
decisions and tasks you must engage in day to day. 
Mastering the flow of your work at all the levels you 
experience that work provides a much more holistic way to 
get things done and feel good about it. 

Part 2 of this book will provide specific coaching about 
how to use these models for making action choices, and 
how the best practices for capturing, clarifying, planning, 
organizing, and reflecting all contribute to your greatest 
success with them. 


Getting Projects Creatively Under 
Way: The Five Phases of Project 
Planning 


THE KEY INGREDIENTS Of relaxed control are (1) clearly defined 
outcomes (projects) and the next actions required to move 
them toward closure, and (2) reminders placed in a trusted 
system that is reviewed regularly. This is what I call 
horizontal focus. Although it may seem simple, the actual 
application of the process can create profound results. 


Enhancing Vertical Focus 


Horizontal focus is all you’ll need in most situations, most of 
the time. Sometimes, however, you may need greater rigor 
and focus to get a project or situation under control, to 
identify a solution, or to ensure that all the right steps have 
been determined. This is where vertical focus comes in. 
Knowing how to think productively in this more vertical way 
and how to integrate the results into your personal system 
is the second powerful behavior set needed for knowledge 
work. 


You’ve got to think about the big things while you’re doing small 
things, so that all the small things go in the right direction. 


—Alvin Toffler 


This kind of thinking doesn’t have to be elaborate. Most 
of the thinking you'll need to do is informal, what I call 
back-of-the-envelope planning—the kind of thing you do 
literally on the back of an envelope or napkin in a coffee 
shop with a colleague as you’re hashing out the agenda and 
structure of a sales presentation. In my experience this 
tends to be the most productive kind of planning you can do 
in terms of your output relative to the energy you put into 
it. True, once in a while everyone may need to develop a 
more formal structure or plan to clarify components, 
sequences, or priorities. And more detailed outlines will 
also be necessary to coordinate more complex situations—if 
teams need to collaborate about various project pieces, for 
example, or if business plans need to be drafted to convince 
an investor you know what you’re doing. But as a general 
rule, you can be pretty creative with nothing more than a 
pen and piece of paper. 


The goal is to get projects and situations sufficiently clear and under 
control to get them off your mind, and not to lose any potentially 
useful ideas. 


The greatest need I’ve seen in project thinking in the 
professional world is not for more formal models; usually 
the people who need those models already have them or 
can get them as part of an academic or professional 
curriculum. Instead, I’ve found the biggest gap to be the 
lack of a project-focusing model for the rest of us. We need 
ways to validate and support our thinking, no matter how 
informal. Formal planning sessions and high-horsepower 
planning tools (such as project management software) can 
certainly be useful at times, but too often the participants in 


a meeting will need to have another meeting—a back-of-the- 
envelope (or whiteboard) session—to actually get a piece of 
work fleshed out and under control. More formal and 
structured meetings also tend to skip over at least one 
critical issue, such as why the project is being done in the 
first place. Or they don’t allow adequate time for 
brainstorming, the development of a bunch of ideas 
nobody’s ever thought about that would make the project 
more interesting, more profitable, or just more fun. And 
finally, very few such meetings bring to bear sufficient rigor 
in determining action steps and accountabilities for the 
various aspects of a project plan. 

The good news is, there is a productive way to think 
about projects, situations, and topics that creates maximum 
value with minimal expenditure of time and effort. It 
happens to be the way we naturally plan when we 
consciously try to get a project under control or simply 
execute for a desired outcome. In my experience, when 
people do more planning, informally and naturally, they 
relieve a great deal of stress and obtain better results. 


The Natural Planning Model 


The most experienced planner in the world is your brain. 


You’re already familiar with the most brilliant and creative 
planner in the world: your brain. You yourself are actually a 
planning machine. You’re planning when you get dressed, 
eat lunch, go to the store, or simply talk. Although the 
process may seem somewhat random, a quite complex 
series of steps has to occur before your brain can make 


anything happen physically. Your mind goes through five 
steps to accomplish virtually any task: 


1 | Defining purpose and principles 
2 | Outcome visioning 

3 | Brainstorming 

4 | Organizing 

5 | Identifying next actions 


A Simple Example: Planning Dinner Out 


The last time you went out to dinner, what initially caused 
you to think about doing it? It could have been any number 
of things—the desire to satisfy hunger, socialize with 
friends, celebrate a special occasion, sign a business deal, 
or develop a romance. As soon as any of these turned into a 
real inclination that you wanted to move on, you started 
planning. Your intention was your purpose, and it 
automatically triggered your internal planning process. 
Your principles created the boundaries of your plan. You 
probably didn’t consciously think about your principles 
regarding going out to dinner, but you thought within them: 
standards of food and service, affordability, convenience, 
and comfort all may have played a part. In any case, your 
purpose and principles were the defining impetus and 
boundaries of your planning. 

Once you decided to fulfill your purpose, what were your 
first substantive thoughts? Probably not “Point II.A.3.b. in 
plan.” Your first ideas were more likely things like “Italian 
food at Giovanni's,” or “Sitting at a sidewalk table at the 
Bistro Café.” You probably also imagined some positive 
picture of what you might experience or how the evening 
would turn out—maybe the people involved, the 
atmosphere, and/or the outcome. That was your outcome 
visioning. Whereas your purpose was the why of your 


going out to dinner, your vision was an image of the what— 
of the physical world’s looking, sounding, and feeling the 
ways that best fulfilled your purpose. 

Once you'd identified with your vision, what did your 
mind naturally begin doing? What did it start to think 
about? “What time should we go?” “Is it open tonight?” 
“Will it be crowded?” “What’s the weather like?” “Should 
we change clothes?” “Is there gas in the car?” “How hungry 
are we?” That was brainstorming. Those questions were 
part of the naturally creative process that happens once 
you commit to some outcome that hasn’t happened yet. 
Your brain noticed a gap between what you were looking 
toward and where you actually were at the time, and it 
began to resolve that cognitive dissonance by trying to fill in 
the blanks. This is the beginning of the how phase of 
natural planning. But it did the thinking in a somewhat 
random and ad hoc fashion. Lots of different aspects of 
going to dinner just occurred to you. You almost certainly 
didn’t need to actually write all of them down on a piece of 
paper, but you did a version of that process in your mind.~ 


The key to intelligent thought is more intelligent thinking. 


Once you had generated a sufficient number of ideas and 
details, you couldn’t help but start to organize them. You 
may have thought or said, “First we need to find out if the 
restaurant is open,” or “Let’s call the Andersons and see if 
they’d like to go out with us.” Once you’ve generated 
various thoughts relevant to the outcome, your mind will 
automatically begin to sort them by components 
(subprojects), priorities, and/or sequences of events. 
Components would be: “We need to handle logistics, 
people, and location.” Priorities would be: “It’s critical to 
find out if the client really would like to go to dinner.” 


Sequences would be: “First we need to check whether the 
restaurant is open, then call the Andersons, then get 
dressed.” This is the section of natural planning that 
incorporates challenge, comparisons, and evaluation, by its 
very nature. One thing is better, bigger, or ahead of 
something else. 

Finally (assuming that you’re really committed to the 
project—in this case, going out to dinner), you focus on the 
next action that you need to take to make the first 
component actually happen. “Call Café Rouge to see if it’s 
open, and make the reservation.” 

These five phases of project planning occur naturally for 
everything you accomplish during the day. It’s how you 
create things—dinner, a relaxing evening, a new product, or 
a new company. You have an urge to make something 
happen; you image the outcome; you generate ideas that 
might be relevant; you sort those into a structure; and you 
define a physical activity that would begin to make ita 
reality. And you do all of that naturally, without giving it 
much thought. 


Natural Planning Is Not Necessarily Normal 


But is the process described in the previous section the way 
your committee is planning the retreat? Is it how your IT 
team is approaching the new system installation? Is it how 
you’re organizing the wedding or thinking through the 
potential merger? 


Have you envisioned wild success about anything lately? 


Have you clarified the primary purpose of the project 
and communicated it to everyone who ought to know it? 


And have you agreed on the standards and behaviors you'll 
need to adhere to in order to make it successful? 

Have you envisioned success and considered all the 
innovative things that might result if you achieved it? 

Have you gotten all possible ideas out on the table— 
everything you need to take into consideration that might 
affect the outcome? 

Have you identified the mission-critical components, key 
milestones, and deliverables? 

Have you defined all the aspects of the project that could 
be moved on right now, what the next action is for each 
part, and who’s responsible for what? 

If you’re like most people I interact with in a coaching or 
consulting capacity, the collective answer to these questions 
is, probably not. There are likely to be at least some 
components of the natural planning model that you haven’t 
implemented. 

In some of my seminars I get participants to actually plan 
a current strategic project that uses this model. In only a 
few minutes they walk themselves through all five phases, 
and usually end up being amazed at how much progress 
they’ve made compared with what they have tried to do in 
the past. One gentleman came up afterward and told me, “I 
don’t know whether I should thank you or be angry. I just 
finished a business plan I’ve been telling myself would take 
months, and now I have no excuses for not doing it!” 

You can try it for yourself right now, if you like. Choose 
one project that is new or stuck or that could simply use 
some improvement. Think of your purpose. Think of what a 
successful outcome would look like: where would you be 
physically, financially, in terms of reputation, or whatever? 
Brainstorm potential steps. Organize your ideas. Decide on 
the next actions. Are you any clearer about where you want 
to go and how to get there? 


The Unnatural Planning Model 


To emphasize the importance of utilizing the natural 
planning model for the more complex things we’re involved 
with, let’s contrast it with the more “normal” model used in 
most environments—what I call unnatural planning. 


When the “Good” Idea Is a Bad Idea 


Have you ever heard a well-intentioned manager or project 
head start a meeting with the question, “OK, so who’s got a 
good idea about this?” 


If you’re waiting to have a good idea before you have any ideas, you 
won’t have many. 


What’s the assumption here? Before any evaluation of 
what’s a good idea can be trusted, the purpose must be 
clear, the vision must be well defined, and all the relevant 
data must have been collected (brainstormed) and analyzed 
(organized). “What’s a good idea?” is a good question, but 
only when you’re about 80 percent of the way through your 
thinking! Starting there would probably blow anyone’s 
creative mental fuses. 

Trying to approach any situation from a perspective that 
is not the natural way your mind operates will be difficult. 
People do it all the time, but it almost always engenders a 
lack of clarity and increased stress. In interactions with 
others, it opens the door for egos, politics, and hidden 
agendas to take over the discussion (generally speaking, 
the most verbally aggressive will run the show). And if it’s 
just you, attempting to come up with a good idea before 
defining your purpose, creating a vision, and collecting lots 


of initial bad ideas is likely to give you a case of creative 
constipation. 


The Reactive Planning Model 


When you find yourself in a hole, stop digging. 


—Will Rogers 


The unnatural model is what most people still consciously 
think of as “planning,” and because it’s so often artificial 
and irrelevant to real work, people just don’t plan. At least 
not on the front end: they resist planning meetings, 
presentations, and strategic operations until the last 
minute. 

But what happens if you don’t plan ahead of time? In 
many cases, crisis! (“Didn’t you get the tickets?” “T thought 
you were going to do that!”) Then, when the urgency of the 
last minute is upon you, the reactive planning model 
ensues. 

What’s the first level of focus when the stuff hits the fan? 
Action! Work harder! Overtime! More people! Get busier! 
And a lot of stressed-out people are thrown at the situation. 

Then, when having a lot of busy people banging into each 
other doesn’t resolve the situation, someone gets more 
sophisticated and says, “We need to get organized!” 
(Catching on now?) Then people draw boxes around the 
problem and label them. Or redraw the boxes and relabel 
them. 


Don’t just do something. Stand there. 


—Rochelle Myer 


At some point they realize that just redrawing boxes isn’t 
really doing much to solve the problem. Now someone 
(much more sophisticated) suggests that more creativity is 
needed. “Let’s brainstorm!” With everyone in the room, 
the boss asks, “So, who’s got a good idea here?” 

When not much happens, the boss may surmise that his 
staff has used up most of its internal creativity. Time to hire 
a consultant! Of course, if the consultant is worth his salt, at 
some point he is probably going to ask the big 
question: “So, what are you really trying to do here, 
anyway?” (vision, purpose). 


Natural Planning Techniques: The Five 
Phases 


It goes without saying, but still must be said again: thinking 
in more effective ways about projects and situations can 
make things happen sooner, better, and more successfully. 
So if our minds plan naturally anyway, what can we learn 
from that? How can we use that model to facilitate getting 
more and better results in our thinking? 

Let’s examine each of the five phases of natural planning 
and see how we can leverage these contexts. 


Purpose 


It never hurts to ask the why question. Almost anything 
you’re currently doing can be enhanced and even 
galvanized by more scrutiny at this top level of focus. Why 
are you going to your next meeting? What’s the purpose of 
your task? Why are you having friends over for dinner? Why 
are you hiring a marketing director instead of an agency? 


Why are you putting up with the situation in your service 
organization? Why do you have a budget? Ad infinitum. 


Fanaticism consists of redoubling your efforts when you have forgotten 
your aim. 


—George Santayana 


I admit it: this is nothing but advanced common sense. To 
know and to be clear about the purpose of any activity are 
prime directives for appropriate focus, creative 
development, and cooperation. But it’s common sense that’s 
not commonly practiced, simply because it’s so easy for us 
to create things, get caught up in the form of what we’ve 
created, and let our connection with our real and primary 
intentions slip. 

I know, based upon thousands of hours spent in many 
offices with many sophisticated people, that the why 
question cannot be ignored. When people complain to me 
about having too many meetings, I have to ask, “What is the 
purpose of the meetings?” When they ask, “Who should I 
invite to the planning session?” I have to ask, “What’s the 
purpose of the planning session?” When the dilemma is 
whether to stay connected with work and e-mail on a 
vacation or not, I have to ask, “What’s the primary purpose 
of the vacation?” Until we have the answer to my questions, 
there’s no possible way to come up with an appropriate 
response to theirs. 


The Value of Thinking About Why 
Here are just some of the benefits of asking why: 


e It defines success. 
e It creates decision-making criteria. 


e It aligns resources. 
e It motivates. 

e It clarifies focus. 

e It expands options. 


People love to win. If you’re not totally clear about the purpose of 
what you’re doing, you have no game to win. 


Let’s take a closer look at each of these in turn. 


It Defines Success People are starved for “wins” these days. 
We love to play games, and we like to win, or at least be ina 
position where we could win. And if you’re not totally clear 
about the purpose of what you’re doing, you have no 
chance of winning. Purpose defines success. It’s the primal 
reference point for any investment of time and energy, from 
deciding to run for elective office to designing a form. 

Ultimately you can’t feel good about a staff meeting 
unless you know what the purpose of the meeting was. And 
if you want to sleep well, you’d better have a good answer 
when your board asks why you fired your head of marketing 
or hired that hotshot MBA as your new finance director. You 
won’t really know whether or not your business plan is any 
good until you hold it up against the success criterion that 
you define by answering the question, “Why do we need a 
business plan?” 


It Creates Decision-Making Criteria How do you decide 
whether to spend the money for a five-color brochure or 
just go with a two-color? How do you know whether it’s 
worth hiring a major Web design firm to handle your new 
Web site? How do you know if you should send your 
daughter to private school? 


Often the only way to make a hard decision is to come back to the 
purpose of what you’re doing. 


It all comes down to purpose. Given what you’re trying to 
accomplish, are these investments required? There’s no 
way to know until the purpose is defined. 


It Aligns Resources How should we spend our staffing 
allocation in the corporate budget? How do we best use the 
cash flow right now to maximize our viability as a retailer 
over the next year? Should we spend more money on the 
luncheon or on the speakers for the monthly association 
meeting? 

In each case, the answer depends on what we’re really 
trying to accomplish—the why. 


If you’re not sure why you’re doing something, you can never do 
enough of it. 


It Motivates Let’s face it: if there’s no good reason to be 
doing something, it’s not worth doing. I’m often stunned by 
how many people have forgotten why they’re doing what 
they’re doing—and by how quickly a simple question like, 
“Why are you doing that?” can get them back on track. 


It Clarifies Focus When you land on the real purpose for 
anything you’re doing, it makes things clearer. Just taking 
two minutes and writing out your primary reason for doing 
something invariably creates an increased sharpness of 
vision, much like bringing a telescope into focus. 
Frequently, projects and situations that have begun to feel 
scattered and blurred grow clearer when someone brings it 


back home by asking, “What are we really trying to 
accomplish here?” 


It Expands Options Paradoxically, even as purpose brings 
things into pinpoint focus, it opens up creative thinking 
about wider possibilities. When you really know the 
underlying why—for the conference, for the staff party, for 
your vacation, for the elimination of the management 
position, or for the merger—it expands your thinking about 
how to make the desired result happen. When people write 
out their purpose for a project in my seminars, they often 
claim it’s like a fresh breeze blowing through their mind, 
clarifying their vision of what they’re doing. 

Is your purpose clear and specific enough? If you’re truly 
experiencing the benefits of a purpose focus—motivation, 
clarity, decision-making criteria, alignment, and creativity— 
then your purpose probably is specific enough. But many 
purpose statements are too vague to produce such results. 
“To have a good team,” for example, might be too broad or 
vague a goal. After all, what constitutes a “good team”? Is it 
a group of people who are highly motivated, collaborating 
in healthy ways, and taking initiative? Or is it a team that 
comes in under budget? In other words, if you don’t really 
know when you’ve met your purpose or when you’re off 
track, you don’t have a viable directive. The question, “How 
will I know when this is off purpose?” must have a clear 
answer. 


Principles 


Simple, clear purpose and principles give rise to complex and 
intelligent behavior. Complex rules and regulations give rise to simple 
and stupid behavior. 


—Dee Hock 


Of equal value as prime criteria for driving and directing a 
project are the standards and values you hold. Although 
people seldom think about these consciously, they are 
always there. And if they are violated, the result will 
inevitably be unproductive distraction and stress. 

A great way to think about what your principles are is to 
complete this sentence: “I would give others totally free 
rein to do this as long as they .. .” As long as they what? 
What policies, stated or unstated, will apply to your group’s 
activities? “As long as they stayed within budget”? “satisfied 
the client”? “ensured a healthy team”? “promoted a positive 
image”? 

It can be a major source of stress when others engage in 
or allow behavior that’s outside your standards. If you 
never have to deal with this issue, you’re truly graced. If 
you do, some constructive conversation about, and 
Clarification of, principles could align the energy and 
prevent unnecessary conflict. You may want to begin by 
asking yourself, “What behavior might undermine what I’m 
doing, and how can I prevent it?” That will give you a good 
starting point for defining your standards. 

Another great reason for focusing on principles is the 
clarity and reference point they provide for positive 
conduct. How do you want or need to work with others on 
this project to ensure its success? What behaviors are in- 
and out-of-bounds for your kids on the family vacation? You 
and others are at your best when you’re acting how? 

Whereas purpose provides the juice and the direction, 
principles define the parameters of action and the criteria 
for excellence of conduct. 


Vision/Outcome 


In order to most productively access the conscious and 
unconscious resources available to you, you must have a 
clear picture in your mind of what success would look, 
sound, and feel like. Purpose and principles furnish the 
impetus and the monitoring, but vision provides the actual 
blueprint of the final result. This is the what instead of the 
why. What will this project or situation really be like when it 
successfully appears in the world? 

For example, graduates of your seminar are 
demonstrating consistently applied knowledge of the 
subject matter. Market share has increased 2 percent 
within the northeastern region over the last fiscal year. Your 
daughter is clear about your guidelines and support for her 
first semester in college. 


The Power of Focus 


Imagination is more important than knowledge. 


—Albert Einstein 


Since the 1960s thousands of books have expounded on the 
value of appropriate positive imagery and focus. Forward- 
looking focus has even been a key element in Olympic-level 
sports training, with athletes imagining the physical effort, 
the positive energy, and the successful result to ensure the 
highest level of unconscious support for their performance. 

We know that the focus we hold in our minds affects what 
we perceive and how we perform. This is as true on the golf 
course as it is in a staff meeting or during a serious 
conversation with a life partner. My interest here lies in 
providing a model for focus that is dynamic in a practical 
way, especially in project thinking. 


When you focus on something—the vacation you’re going 
to take, the meeting you’re about to go into, the project you 
want to launch—that focus instantly creates ideas and 
thought patterns you wouldn’t have had otherwise. Even 
your physiology will respond to an image in your head as if 
it were reality. 


The Reticular Activating System The May 1957 issue of 
Scientific American magazine contains an article describing 
the discovery of the reticular formation at the base of the 
brain. The reticular formation is basically the gateway to 
your conscious awareness; it’s the switch that turns on your 
perception of ideas and data, the thing that keeps you 
asleep even when music’s playing but wakes you if a special 
little baby cries in another room. 


Your automatic creative mechanism is teleological. That is, it operates 
in terms of goals and end results. Once you give it a definite goal to 
achieve, you can depend upon its automatic guidance system to take 
you to that goal much better than “you” ever could by conscious 
thought. “You” supply the goal by thinking in terms of end results. 
Your automatic mechanism then supplies the means whereby. 


—Maxwell Maltz 


Just like a computer, your brain has a search function— 
but it’s even more phenomenal than a computer’s. It seems 
to be programmed by what we focus on and, more 
primarily, what we identify with. It’s the seat of what many 
people have referred to as the paradigms we maintain. We 
notice only what matches our internal belief systems and 
identified contexts. If you’re an optometrist, for example, 
you'll tend to notice people wearing eyeglasses across a 
crowded room; if you’re a building contractor, you may 
notice the room’s physical details. If you focus on the color 
red right now and then just glance around your 


environment, if there is any red at all, you'll see even the 
tiniest bits of it. 

The implications of how this filtering works—how we are 
unconsciously made conscious of information—could fill a 
weeklong seminar, if not the rest of your life! Suffice it to 
say that something automatic and extraordinary happens in 
your mind when you create and focus on a clear picture of 
what you want. 


Clarifying Outcomes 


There is a simple but profound principle that emerges from 
understanding the way your perceptive filters work: you 
won't see how to do it until you see yourself doing it. 


You often need to make it up in your mind before you can make it 
happen in your life. 


It’s easy to envision something happening if it has 
happened before or you have had experience with similar 
successes. It can be quite a challenge, however, to identify 
with images of success if they represent new and foreign 
territory—that is, if you have few reference points about 
what an event might actually look like and little experience 
of your own ability to make it happen. 

Many of us hold ourselves back from imagining a desired 
outcome unless someone can show us how to get there. 
Unfortunately, that’s backward in terms of how our minds 
work to generate and recognize solutions and methods. 


I always wanted to be somebody. I should have been more specific. 


—Lily Tomlin 


One of the most powerful life skills, and one of the most 
important to hone and develop for both professional and 
personal success, is creating clear outcomes. This is not as 
self-evident as it may sound. We need to constantly define 
(and redefine) what we’re trying to accomplish on many 
different levels, and consistently reallocate resources 
toward getting these tasks complete as effectively and 
efficiently as possible. 

What will this project look like when it’s done? How do 
you want the client to feel, and what do you want him to 
know and do after the presentation? Where will you be in 
your career three years from now? How would the ideal 
head of finance do his job? What would your Web site really 
look like and have as capabilities if it could be the way you 
wanted it? What would your relationship with your son feel 
like if this conversation you need to have with him were 
successful? 

Outcome/vision can range from a simple statement of the 
project, such as “Finalize computer-system 
implementation,” to a completely scripted movie depicting 
the future scene in all its glorious detail. 

When I am able to get people to focus on a successful 
scenario of their project, they usually experience 
heightened enthusiasm and think of something unique and 
positive about it that didn’t occur to them before. “Wouldn’t 
it be great if...” is not a bad way to start thinking about a 
situation, at least for long enough to have the option of 
getting an answer. 


Brainstorming 


The best way to get a good idea is to get lots of ideas. 


—Linus Pauling 


Once you know what you want to happen and why, the how 
mechanism is brought into play. When you identify with 
some picture in your mind that is different from your 
current reality, you automatically start filling in the gaps, or 
brainstorming. Ideas begin to pop into your head in 
somewhat random order—little ones, big ones, not-so-good 
ones, good ones. This process usually goes on internally for 
most people about most things, and that’s often sufficient. 
For example, you think about what you want to say to your 
boss as you’re walking down the hall to speak to her. But 
there are many other instances when writing things down, 
or capturing them in some external way, can give a 
tremendous boost to productive output and thinking. 


Your mind wants to figure out how to get from here to there, but 
initially in somewhat random order. 


Capturing Your Ideas 


Over the past several decades, a number of graphics- 
oriented brainstorming techniques have been introduced to 
help develop creative thinking about projects and topics. 
They’ve been given names such as mind mapping, 
clustering, patterning, webbing, and fish boning. Although 
the authors of these various processes may portray them as 
being different from one another, for most of us end users 
the basic premise remains the same: give yourself 
permission to capture and express any idea, and then later 
on figure out how it fits in and what to do with it. If nothing 
else (and there is plenty of “else”), this practice adds to 
your efficiency—when you have the idea, you grab it, which 
means you won’t have to have the idea again. 


The most popular of these concepts and techniques is 
called mind mapping, a name coined by Tony Buzan, a 
British researcher in brain functioning, to label this process 
of brainstorming ideas into a graphic format. In mind 
mapping, the core idea is presented in the center, with 
associated ideas growing out in a somewhat free-form 
fashion around it. For instance, if I found out that I had to 
move my office, I might think about computers, changing 
my business cards, all the connections I’d have to change, 
new furniture, moving the phones, purging and packing, 
and so on. If I capture these thoughts graphically it might 
start to look something like this: 





You could do this kind of mind mapping on Post-its that 
could be stuck on a whiteboard, or you could input ideas 


into a word processing program, outlining program, or one 
of the many mind-mapping software applications on the 
market. 


Distributed Cognition 


The great thing about external brainstorming is that in 
addition to capturing your original ideas, it can help 
generate many new ones that might not have occurred to 
you if you didn’t have a mechanism to hold your thoughts 
and continually reflect them back to you. It’s as if your mind 
were to Say, “Look, I’m only going to give you as many ideas 
as you feel you can effectively use. If you’re not collecting 
them in some trusted way, I won’t give you that many. But if 
you’re actually doing something with the ideas—even if it’s 
just recording them for later evaluation—then here, have a 
bunch! And, oh wow! That reminds me of another one, and 
another,” etc. 


Nothing is more dangerous than an idea when it is the only one you 
have. 


—Emile Chartier 


Psychologists have now labeled this and similar 
processes “distributed cognition.” It’s getting things out of 
your head and into objective, reviewable formats—building 
an “extended mind.” But my English teacher in high school 
didn’t have to know about the theory to give me the key: 
“David,” he said, “you’re going to college, and you’re going 
to be writing papers. Write all your notes and quotes on 
separate three-by-five-inch cards. Then, when you get 
ready to organize your thinking, just spread them all out on 
the floor, see the natural structure that emerges, and figure 


out what’s missing. Mr. Edmundson was teaching me a 
major piece of the natural planning model! 


Only he who handles his ideas lightly is master of his ideas, and only 
he who is master of his ideas is not enslaved by them. 


—Lin Yutang 


Few people can hold their focus on a topic for more than 
a couple of minutes without some objective structure and 
tool or trigger to help them. Pick a big project you have 
going right now and just try to think of nothing else for 
more than thirty seconds. This is pretty hard to do unless 
you have a pen and paper in hand and use one of those 
“cognitive artifacts” as the anchor for your ideas. Then you 
can stay with it for hours. That’s why good thinking can 
happen while you’re working on a computer document 
about a project, mind mapping it on a notepad, doodling 
about it on a paper tablecloth, or just having a meeting 
about it with other people in a room that allows you to hold 
the context (a whiteboard with nice wet markers really 
helps there, too). 


Brainstorming Keys 


Many techniques can be used to facilitate brainstorming 
and out-of-the-box thinking. The basic principles, however, 
can be summed up as follows: 


e Don’t judge, challenge, evaluate, or criticize. 
e Go for quantity, not quality. 
e Put analysis and organization in the background. 


Determining what might go most wrong in a situation is at times the 
best way to generate the best ideas about how to make it successful. 


Don’t Judge, Challenge, Evaluate, or Criticize It’s easy for 
the unnatural planning model to rear its ugly head in 
brainstorming, making people jump to premature 
evaluations and critiques of ideas. If you care even slightly 
about what a critic thinks, you'll censor your expressive 
process as you look for the “right” thing to say. There’s a 
very subtle distinction between keeping brainstorming on 
target with the topic and stifling the creative process. It’s 
also important that brainstorming be put into the overall 
context of the planning process, because if you think you’re 
doing it just for its own sake, it can seem trite and 
inappropriately off course. If you can understand it instead 
as something you’re doing right now, for a certain period, 
before you move toward a resolution at the end, you'll feel 
more comfortable giving this part of the process its due. 

This is not to suggest that you should shut off critical 
thinking, though—everything ought to be fair game at this 
stage. “Here’s what might be wrong with that approach” 
needs to be on the table, if it’s present. Often it’s the most 
challenging and critical ideas that have the germ of the best 
ones. It’s just wise to understand what kinds of thoughts 
you’re having and to park them for use in the most 
appropriate way. The primary criteria must be inclusion and 
expansion, not constriction and contraction. 


Go for Quantity, Not Quality Going for quantity keeps your 
thinking expansive. Often you won’t know what’s a good 
idea until you have it. And sometimes you'll realize it’s a 
good idea, or the germ of one, only later on. You know how 
shopping at a big store with lots of options lets you feel 
comfortable about your choice? The same holds true for 
project thinking. The greater the volume of thoughts you 
have to work with, the better the context you can create for 
developing options and trusting your choices. 


Put Analysis and Organization in the Background Analysis 
and evaluation and organization of your thoughts should be 
given as free a rein as creative, out-of-the-box thinking. But 
in the brainstorming phase, this critical activity should not 
be the driver. 

Making a list can be a creative thing to do; it’s a way to 
consider the people who should be on your team, the 
customer requirements for the software, or the components 
of the business plan. Just make sure to grab all that and 
keep going until you get into the weeding and organizing of 
focus that make up the next stage. 


Organizing 


A project plan identifies the smaller outcomes, which can then be 
naturally planned. 


If you’ve done a thorough job of emptying your head of all 
the things that came up in the brainstorming phase, you'll 
notice that a natural organization is emerging. As my high 
school English teacher suggested, once you get all the ideas 
out of your head and in front of your eyes, you'll 
automatically notice natural relationships and structure. 
This is what most people are referring to when they talk 
about organizing a project. 

Organizing usually happens when you identify 
components and subcomponents, sequences of events, 
and/or priorities. What are the things that must occur to 
create the final result? In what order must they occur? 
What is the most important element to ensure the success 
of the project? 

This is the stage in which you can make good use of 
structuring tools ranging from informal bullet points 


scribbled on the back of an envelope to heavy-horsepower 
project-planning software. When a project calls for 
substantial objective control, you’ll need some type of 
hierarchical outline with components and subcomponents, 
and/or a Gantt-type chart showing stages of the project laid 
out over time, with independent and dependent parts and 
milestones identified in relationship to the whole. 

Creative thinking doesn’t stop here; it just takes another 
form. Once you perceive a basic structure, your mind will 
start trying to fill in the blanks. Identifying the three key 
things that you need to handle on the project, for example, 
may cause you to think of a fourth and a fifth when you see 
them all lined up. 


The Basics of Organizing 


The key steps here are: 


e Identify the significant pieces 
e Sort by (one or more): 

¢ components 

e sequences 

¢ priorities 
e Detail to the required degree 


I have never seen any two projects that needed to have 
exactly the same amount of structure and detail developed 
in order to get things off people’s minds and moving 
successfully. But almost all projects can use some form of 
creative thinking from the sequential part of the brain, 
along the lines of “What’s the plan?” 


Next Actions 


The final stage of planning comes down to decisions about 
the allocation and reallocation of physical resources to 
actually get the project moving. The question to ask here is, 
“What’s the next action?” 

As we noted in the previous chapter, this kind of 
grounded, reality-based thinking, combined with 
clarification of the desired outcome, forms the critical 
component for defining and clarifying what our real work is. 
In my experience, creating a list of what your real projects 
are and consistently managing your next action for each 
one will constitute 90 percent of what is generally thought 
of as project planning. This ground-floor approach will 
make you honest about all kinds of things. Are you really 
serious about doing this? Who’s responsible? Have you 
thought things through enough? 

At some point, if the project is an actionable one, this 
next-action-thinking decision must be made.* Answering 
the question about what, specifically, you would do about 
something physically if you had nothing else to do will test 
the maturity of your thinking about the project. If you’re not 
yet ready to answer that question, you have more to flesh 
out at some prior level in the natural planning sequence. 


The Basics 


e Decide on next actions for each of the current “moving 
parts” of the project. 

e Decide on the next action in the planning process, if 
necessary. 


Activating the Moving Parts A project is sufficiently planned 
for implementation when every next-action step has been 
decided on every front that can actually be moved on 
without some other component’s having to be completed 
first. If the project has multiple components, each of them 


should be assessed appropriately by asking, “Is there 
something that anyone could be doing on this right now?” 
You could be coordinating speakers for the conference, for 
instance, at the same time that you’re finding the 
appropriate site. 

In some cases there will be only one aspect that can be 
activated, and everything else will depend on the results of 
that. So there may be only one next action, which will be 
the linchpin for all the rest. 


More to Plan? What if there’s still more planning to be done 
before you can feel comfortable with what’s next? There’s 
still an action step—it is just a process action. What’s the 
next step in the continuation of planning? Drafting more 
ideas. E-mailing Ana Maria and Sean to get their input. 
Telling your assistant to set up a planning meeting with the 
product team. 

The habit of clarifying the next action on projects, no 
matter what the situation, is fundamental to you staying in 
relaxed control. 


When the Next Action Is Someone Else’s .. . If the next 
action is not yours, you must nevertheless clarify whose it is 
(this is a primary use of the Waiting For action list). Ina 
group-planning situation, it isn’t necessary for everyone to 
know what the next step is on every part of the project. 
Often all that’s required is to allocate responsibility for 
parts of the project to the appropriate persons and leave it 
up to them to identify next actions on their particular 
pieces. 

This next-action conversation forces organizational 
clarity. Issues and details emerge that don’t show up until 
someone holds everyone’s feet to the fire about the 
physical-level reality of resource allocation. It’s a simple 
practical discussion to foster, and one that can significantly 
stir the pot and identify weak links. 


How Much Planning Do You Really Need to Do? 


How much of this planning model do you really need to 
flesh out, and to what degree of detail? The simple answer 
is, as much as you need to get the project off your mind. 

In general, the reason things are on your mind is that the 
outcome and action step(s) have not been appropriately 
defined, and/or reminders of them have not been put in 
places where you can be trusted to look for them 
appropriately. Additionally, you may not have developed the 
details, perspectives, and solutions sufficiently to trust the 
efficacy of your blueprint. 


If the project is still on your mind, there’s more thinking required. 


Most projects, given my definition of a project as an 
outcome requiring more than one action, need no more 
than a listing of their outcome and next action for you to get 
them off your mind. You need a new stockbroker? You just 
have to call a friend for a recommendation. You want to set 
up a new printer at home? You just need to surf the Web to 
check out different models and prices. I estimate that 80 
percent of projects are of that nature. You'll still be doing 
the full planning model on all of them, but only in your 
head, and just enough to figure out next actions and keep 
them going until they’re complete. 

Another 15 percent or so of projects might require at 
least some external form of brainstorming—maybe a mind 
map or a few notes in a word processing or presentation 
program. That might be sufficient for planning meeting 
agendas, your vacation, or a speech to the local chamber of 
commerce. 

A final 5 percent of projects might need the deliberate 
application of one or more of the five phases of the natural 
planning model. The model provides a practical recipe for 


unsticking things, resolving them, and moving them 
forward productively. Are you aware of a need for greater 
clarity, or great action, on any of your projects? If so, using 
the model can often be the key to making effective 
progress. 


Need More Clarity? 


If greater clarity is what you need, shift your thinking up 
the natural planning scale. People are often very busy 
(action) but nonetheless experience confusion and a lack of 
clear direction. They need to pull out the plan or create one 
(organize). If there’s a lack of clarity at the planning level, 
there’s probably a need for more brainstorming to generate 
a sufficient inventory of current ideas and data to create 
trust in the plan. If the brainstorming session gets bogged 
down with fuzzy thinking, the focus should shift back to the 
vision of the outcome, ensuring that the reticular filter in 
the brain will open up to deliver the how-to thinking. If the 
outcome/Vvision is unclear, you must return to a clean 
analysis of why you’re engaged in the situation in the first 
place (purpose). 


Need More to Be Happening? 


If more action is what’s needed, you need to move down the 
model. There may be enthusiasm about the purpose ofa 
project but at the same time some resistance to actually 
fleshing out what fulfilling it in the real world might look 
like. These days, the task of improving quality of work life 
may be on the radar for a manager, but often he won’t yet 
have defined a clear picture of the desired result. The 
thinking must go to the specifics of the vision. Again, ask 
yourself, “What would the outcome look like?” 


If you’ve formulated an answer to that question, but 
things are still stuck, it’s probably time for you to grapple 
with some of the How issues and the operational details and 
perspectives (brainstorming). I often have clients who have 
inherited a relatively clearly articulated project, such as 
“Implement the new performance-review system,” but who 
aren’t moving forward because they haven’t yet taken a few 
minutes to dump some ideas out about what that might 
entail. 

If brainstorming gets hung up (and very often it does for 
the more “blue sky” types), rigor may be required to do 
some evaluation of and decision making about mission- 
critical deliverables that have to be handled (organizing). 
This is sometimes the case when an informal back-and-forth 
meeting that has generated lots of ideas ends without 
producing any decision about what actually needs to 
happen next on the project. 

And if there is a plan, but the rubber still isn’t hitting the 
road like it should, someone needs to assess each 
component with the focus of “What’s the next action, and 
who’s got it?” One manager, who had taken over 
responsibility many months in advance for organizing a 
major annual conference, asked me how to prevent the 
crisis all-nighters her team had experienced near the 
deadline of the previous year. When she produced an 
outline of the various pieces of the project she’d inherited, I 
asked, “Which pieces could actually be moved on right 
now?” After identifying half a dozen, we clarified the next 
action on each one. It was off and running, in time to 
prevent a repeat of the previous year’s last-minute chaos. 


In the prior two chapters, I covered the basic models of how 
to stay maximally productive and in control, with minimal 


effort, at the two most basic levels of our life and work: the 
actions we take and the projects we enter into that 
generate many of those actions. 


You need no new skills to increase your productivity and reduce your 
stress—just an enhanced set of systematic behaviors with which to 
apply them. 


The fundamentals remain true—you must be responsible 
for collecting all your open loops, applying a front-end 
thought process to each of them, and managing the results 
with organization, review, and action. 


Plans get you into things but you’ve got to work your way out. 


—Will Rogers 


For all those situations that you have any level of 
commitment to complete, there is a natural planning 
process that occurs to get you from here to there. 
Leveraging that five-phase model can often make the 
evolution easier, faster, and more productive. 

These models are simple to understand and easy to 
implement. Applying them creates remarkable results. You 
need essentially no new skills—you already know how to 
write things down, clarify outcomes, decide next actions, 
put things into categories, review it all, and make intuitive 
choices. Right now you have the ability to focus on 
successful results, brainstorm, organize your thinking, and 
get moving on your next steps. 

But just knowing how to do all of those things does not 
produce results. Merely having the ability to be highly 
productive, relaxed, and in control doesn’t make you that 
way. If you’re like most people, you could use a coach— 


someone to walk you step-by-step through the experience 

and provide some guideposts and handy tricks along the 

way, until your new operational style is elegantly embedded. 
You'll find that in part 2. 


part 
2. 


Practicing Stress-Free 
Productivity 





Getting Started: Setting Up the 
Time, Space, and Tools 


IN PaRT 2 We'll move from a conceptual framework and limited 
application of workflow mastery to full-scale 
implementation and best practices. Going through this 
program often gives people a level of relaxed control they 
may never have experienced before, but it usually requires 
the catalyst of step-by-step procedures to get there. To that 
end, I’ll provide a logical sequence of things to do, to make 
it as easy as possible for you to get on board and glean the 
most value from these techniques. 

Much of the detail in this section can easily seem more 
than you can digest or implement on a first read. It’s 
included to provide a blow-by-blow instruction manual for 
you if you’ve decided to do a full-scale implementation of 
the model, which could take at least two full, uninterrupted 
days to implement. It is information and suggestions you 
will very likely want to revisit at some point, to glean a new 
level of application, as you get started down the GTD path. 


Implementation—Whether All-Out or 
Casual—Is a Lot About “Tricks” 


If you’re not sure you’re committed to an all-out 
implementation of these methods, let me assure you that 
much of the value people get from this material is good 


tricks. Sometimes just one good trick can make it 
worthwhile to range through this information: I’ve had 
people tell me, for example, that the best thing they got 
from our seminars was simply the two-minute rule. Tricks 
are for the not-so-smart, not-so-conscious part of us. To a 
great degree, the highest-performing people I know are 
those who have installed the best tricks in their lives. I 
know that’s true of me. The smart part of us sets up things 
for us to do that the not-so-smart part responds to almost 
automatically, creating behavior that produces high- 
performance results. We trick ourselves into doing what we 
ought to be doing. 


It is easier to act yourself into a better way of feeling than to feel 
yourself into a better way of action. 


—O. H. Mowrer 


For instance, if you’re a semi-regular exerciser like I am, 
you probably have your own little tricks to get yourself to 
exercise. My best trick is costume—the clothing I put on or 
take off. If I put on exercise gear, I’ll start to feel like 
exercising; if I don’t I’m very likely to feel like doing 
something else. 

Let’s look at an example of a real productivity trick. 
You’ve probably taken work home that you had to bring 
back the next day, right? It was mission-critical that you not 
forget it the next morning. So where did you put it the night 
before? Did you put it in front of the door, or on your keys, 
so you'd be sure to take it with you? For this you get an 
education? What a sophisticated piece of selfmanagement 
technology you've installed in your life! But actually that’s 
just what it is. The smart part of you the night before knows 
that the not-so-smart part of you first thing in the morning 


may barely be conscious. “What’s this in front of the door? 
Oh, that’s right, I’ve got to take this with me!” 

What a class act. But really, it is. It’s a trick I call Put It in 
Front of the Door. For our purposes the “door” is going to 
be the door of your mind, not your house. But it’s the same 
idea. 

If you were to take out your calendar right now and look 
closely at every single item for the next fourteen days, you’d 
probably come up with at Jeast one “Oh, that reminds me, I 
needto _.” If you then captured that value-added 
thought into some place that would trigger you to act, you’d 
feel better already, have a clearer head, and get more 
positive things done. It’s not rocket science, just a good 
trick. 

If you take out a clean sheet of paper right now, along 
with your favorite writing instrument, and for three minutes 
focus solely on the most awesome project on your mind, I 
guarantee you'll have at least one “Oh, yeah, I need to 
consider _.” Then capture what shows up in your head 
on the piece of paper and put it where you might actually 
use the idea or information. You won’t be one ounce 
smarter than you were ten minutes ago, but you'll have 
added value to your work and life. 


The big secret to efficient creative and productive thinking and action 
is to put the right things in your focus at the right time. 


Much of learning how to manage workflow in a masterful 
way is about laying out the gear and practicing the moves 
so that the requisite thinking happens more automatically 
and it’s a lot easier to get engaged in the game. The 
suggestions that follow about getting time, space, and tools 
in place are all trusted methods for making things happen 
at a terrific new level. 


If you’re sincere about making a major leap forward in 
your personal management systems, I recommend that you 
pay close attention to the details and follow through on the 
suggestions provided next in their entirety. The whole will 
be greater than the sum of the parts. You'll also discover 
that the execution of this program will produce real 
progress on real things that are going on in your life right 
now. We’ll get lots done that you want to get done, in new 
and efficient ways that may amaze you. 


Setting Aside the Time 


Don’t be afraid to take a big step if one is indicated. You can’t cross a 
chasm in two small jumps. 


—David L. George 


I recommend that you create a block of time to initialize this 
process and prepare a workstation with the appropriate 
space, furniture, and tools. If your space is properly set up 
and streamlined, it can reduce your unconscious resistance 
to dealing with your stuff and even make it attractive for 
you to sit down and crank through your input and your 
work. An ideal time frame for most people is two whole 
days, back to back. (Don’t be put off by that if you don’t 
have that long to spend, though: doing any of the activities I 
suggest will be useful, no matter how much or how little 
time you devote to them. Two days are not required to 
benefit from these techniques and principles—they will 
start to pay off almost instantly.) Implementing the full 
capturing process can take up to six hours or more, and 
clarifying and deciding on actions for all the input you'll 
want to externalize and capture in your system can easily 


take another eight hours. Of course, you can also collect 
and process your stuff in chunks, but it’ll be much easier if 
you can tackle that front-end portion in one fell swoop. 

The ideal time for me to work with someone in 
implementing this methodology is on a weekend or holiday, 
because the chance of outside disturbance is minimal then. 
If I work with someone on a typical workday, we first make 
sure that no meetings are scheduled and only emergency 
interruptions are allowed; phone calls are routed to voice 
mail or logged by assistants for review and handling during 
a break. I don’t recommend using after-hours for this work. 
It usually means seriously reduced horsepower and a big 
tendency to get caught up in “rabbit trails.”= 


Dedicate two days to this process, and it will be worth many times that 
in terms of your productivity and mental health. 


For many of the executives I work with, holding the 
world back for two contiguous days is the hardest part of 
the whole process—the perceived necessity to be constantly 
available for meetings and communications when they’re at 
work is difficult for them to let go of. That’s why we often 
resort to weekends. If you work in an open cubicle or office, 
it will be even more of a challenge to isolate sufficient time 
blocks on a regular workday during office hours. 

It’s not that the procedure itself is so sacred; it’s just that 
it takes a lot of mental energy to capture and make 
decisions about such a large inventory of open loops, 
especially when they’ve been open, undecided, or stuck for 
way too long. Interruptions can double the time it takes to 
get through everything. If you can get to ground zero in 
one contained time period, it gives you a huge sense of 
control and accomplishment and frees up a reservoir of 
energy and creativity. Later on you can maintain your 


system in shorter spurts “between the lines” of your regular 
day. 


Setting Up the Space 


You'll need to choose a physical location to serve as your 
central cockpit of control. If you already have a desk and 
office space set up where you work, that’s probably the best 
place to start. If you work from a home office, obviously that 
will be your prime location. If you already have both, you'll 
want to establish identical, even interchangeable systems in 
both places, though one will probably be primary. If you feel 
that you don’t have either—you really don’t have any 
central physical spot you would call home for dealing with 
your stuff—it’s imperative that you create one. Even if you 
have a mobile, high-tech life that is primarily virtual, you'll 
still require a private setting as a base camp from which to 
operate. You will want to implement this program wherever 
you might actually do work and process input, but starting 
with a primary location is optimal. 

The basics for a workspace are just a writing surface and 
room for an in-tray, and probably (for most people) space 
for core digital tools as well. Some, such as a foreman ina 
machine shop, an intake nurse on a hospital floor, or your 
children’s nanny, won’t need much more than that. Most 
homemakers won’t necessarily need a large area to manage 
their workflow, but having enough of a discrete space 
dedicated to the processing of notes, mail, home and family 
projects and activities, finances, and the like is critical. 
Usually this business-of life stuff is scattered helter-skelter 
in the kitchen, in the hallway, on the dining table, on book 
and media shelves, etc., with a numbing effect. 

The writing surface will of course expand for most 
professionals, to include a phone (and charger), a 


computer, stacking trays, working file drawers, reference 
shelves. Some may feel the need for a printer, whiteboards, 
and/or multimedia conferencing equipment. The seriously 
self-contained will also want gear for exercise, leisure, and 
hobbies. 


You must have a dedicated, individual, self-contained workspace—at 
home, at work, and even in transit. 


A functional workspace is critical. If you don’t already 
have a dedicated workspace and in-tray, get them now. That 
goes for students, homemakers, and retirees, too. Everyone 
must have a physical locus of control from which to deal 
with everything else. 

If I had to set up an emergency workstation in just a few 
minutes, I would buy an unfinished door, place it on top of 
two two-drawer filing cabinets (one at each end), place 
three stack trays on it, and add a paper, pad, and pen. That 
would be my home base. (If I had time to sit down, I’d also 
buy a stool!) Believe it or not, I’ve been in several executive 
offices that wouldn’t be as functional. 


If You Go to an Office, You’ll Still Need a Space at 
Home 


Don’t skimp on workspace at home. As you'll discover 
through this process, it’s critical that you have at least a 
satellite home system identical to the one in your office. 
Many people I’ve worked with have been somewhat 
embarrassed by the degree of chaos that reigns in their 
homes, in contrast to their offices at work; they’ve gotten 
tremendous value from giving themselves permission to 
establish the same setup in both places. If you’re like many 


of them, you’ll find that a weekend spent setting up a home 
workstation can make a revolutionary change in your ability 
to organize your life. 


An Office Space in Transit 


If you move around much, as a business traveler or just asa 
person with a mobile lifestyle, you’ll also want to set up an 
efficiently organized micro-office-in-transit. More than likely 
this will consist of a briefcase, pack, or satchel with 
appropriate folders and portable workstation supplies. 
Many people lose opportunities to be productive because 
they’re not equipped to take advantage of the odd moments 
and windows of time that open up as they move from one 
place to another, or when they’re in off-site environments. 
The combination of a good processing style, the right tools, 
and good interconnected systems at home and at work can 
make traveling a highly leveraged way to get certain kinds 
of work done. As technology continues to deliver both more 
powerful mobile hardware and fast global access to most of 
us, the ability to virtually manage your life increases. But 
the problem inherent with that is the confusion of managing 
the traffic that ensues with all the options available on your 
mobile device(s). Without a good capturing, clarifying, and 
organizing methodology in place, with the appropriate 
applications and tools structured to handle it as it happens, 
the new world of global mobile access will be underutilized, 
if not a source of unproductive distraction and stress itself. 


Don’t Share Space! 


It is imperative that you have your own workspace—or at 
least your own in-tray and a place in which to process paper 
and physical material. Too many couples I’ve worked with 
have tried to work out of a single desk at home, and it 


always makes light-years of difference when they expand to 
two workstations. Far from being the “separation” they 
expect, the move in fact relieves them of a subtle stress in 
their relationship about managing the stuff of their shared 
lives. One couple even decided to set up an additional mini- 
workstation in the kitchen for the stay-at-home mom, so she 
could process work while keeping an eye on their infant in 
the family room. 


You need to use your system—not continually have to re-create it. 


Some organizations are interested in the concept of 
“hotel-ing”—that is, having people create totally self- 
contained and mobile workstation capabilities so they can 
“plug in” anywhere in the company, at any time, and work 
from there. That can provide savings in office space 
requirements, as companies operate more virtually with a 
workforce that can function independently from the 
“mother ship.” But that presupposes that each worker 
involved has a locus of control on his or her own. 
Experiments have failed in this scheme, because they 
disrupted the stable workstation. There must be zero 
resistance to using the systems we have. Having to 
continually reinvent our in-tray, our filing system, and how 
and where we process our stuff (“Where’s a darn Post-it, 
and a stapler?!”) can only be a source of incessant 
distraction. 

You can work virtually anywhere if you have a clean, 
compact system and know how to process your stuff rapidly 
and portably. But you’ll still need a home base with a well- 
grooved set of tools and sufficient space for all the 
reference and support material that you’ll want somewhere 
close at hand when you land. Most people I work with need 
at least two file drawers for their general-reference and 


project-support types of paper-based materials. Given 
digital scanners and the continual technology advances in 
this regard, it is conceivable that one day all that support 
material can be in the cloud and retrievable as needed, 
anywhere. But it will still be a while before you don’t need 
your physical passport, EU cash you brought back from 
your trip to Milan, and temporary paper-based 
documentation of all sorts that remains the optimum way to 
handle some data. Big or small, that inventory of reference 
and collateral items needs a home, with easy access to it. 


Getting the Tools You’ll Need 


If you’re committed to a full implementation of this 
workflow process, there are some basic supplies and 
equipment that you’ll need to get you started. As you go 
along, you’re likely to dance between using what you’re 
used to and evaluating any possibilities for new and 
different gear to work with. 

Note that good tools don’t necessarily have to be 
expensive. Often, on the low-tech side, the more “executive” 
something looks, the more dysfunctional it really is. 


The Basic Processing Tools 


Let’s assume you’re starting from scratch. In addition toa 
desktop workspace, you'll need: 


e Paper-holding trays (at least three) 
A stack of plain letter-size paper 

A pen/pencil 

Post-its (3x 3"s) 

Paper clips 


A stapler and staples 

Scotch tape 

Rubber bands 

An automatic labeler 

File folders 

A calendar 

Wastebasket/recycling bins 

Current tools being used for data capture, organizing, 
and to-do lists, including mobile devices, personal 
computers, and paper-based planners and notebooks (if 
any) 


Paper-Holding Trays 


These will serve as your in-tray and out-tray, with one or 
two others for work-in-progress support papers and/or your 
read-and-review stack. The most functional trays are the 
side-facing letter- or legal-sized stackable kinds, which have 
no “lip” on them to keep you from sliding out a single piece 
of paper. 


Plain Paper 


You'll use plain paper for the initial collection process. 
Believe it or not, putting one thought on one full-size sheet 
of paper can have enormous value. Most people will wind 
up processing their notes into some sort of list organizer, 
but by having initial thoughts separated into discrete 
placeholders (versus on one amorphous list), it makes it 
easier to wrestle it to closure later, in the processing and 
organizing steps. In any case, it’s important to have plenty 
of letter-size writing paper or tablets around to make 
capturing ad hoc input easy. 


Post-its, Clips, Stapler, Etc. 


Moment-to-moment collecting, thinking, processing, and organizing 
are challenging enough; always ensure that you have the tools to 
make them as easy as possible. 


Post-its, clips, stapler, tape, and rubber bands will come in 
handy for routing and storing paper-based materials. 
Though their use is diminishing, we’re not finished with 
paper and other physical materials yet (if you haven’t 
noticed!), and the simple tools for managing them are 
essential. 


Labeler 


The labeler is a surprisingly useful tool in this process. 
Thousands of people we have worked with now have their 
own automatic labelers, and our archives are full of their 
comments, like “Incredible—I wouldn’t have believed what 
a difference it makes!” The labeler will be used to label file 
folders, binder spines, and numerous other things. 

I prefer a stand-alone tool or a simple plug-and-play 
labeler for the computer that can make single labels in the 
moment, reducing any friction to filing something when it 
shows up. 


File Folders 


You'll need plenty of file folders. You may also need an equal 
number of file-folder hangers, if your filing system requires 
them. Plain-colored folders are fine—color-coding is a level 
of complexity that’s hardly ever worth the effort. Your 
general-reference filing system should just be a simple 
library.~ 


Calendar 


Although you may not need a calendar just to collect your 
incomplete items, you’ll certainly come up with actions that 
need to be put there, nonetheless. As I noted earlier, the 
calendar should be used not to hold action lists but to track 
the “hard landscape” of things that have to get done ona 
specific day or at a specific time. 

Most professionals these days already have some sort of 
working calendar system in place, ranging from loose-leaf 
organizers to mobile devices to shared enterprise software 
applications. 

The calendar has often been the central tool that people 
rely on to be “organized.” It’s certainly a critical component 
in managing particular kinds of data and reminders of the 
commitments and information that relate to specific times 
and days. There are many reminders and some data that 
you will want a calendar for, but you won’t be stopping 
there: your calendar will need to be integrated with a much 
more comprehensive system that will emerge as you apply 
this method. 

You may wonder what kind of calendar would be best to 
use, and I’ll discuss that in more detail in the next chapter. 
For now, just keep using the one you’ve got. After you 
develop a feel for the whole systematic approach, you'll 
have a better reference point for deciding about graduating 
to a different tool. 


Wastebasket/Recycling Bins 


If you’re like most people, when you implement this process 
you’re going to toss a lot more stuff than you expect, so get 
ready to create a good bit of trash. Some executives I have 
coached have found it extremely useful to arrange fora 
large trash bin to be parked immediately outside their 
offices the day we work together! 


Do You Need an Organizer? 


Once you know how to process your stuff and what to organize, you 
really just need to create and manage lists. 


Whether or not you need an organizer tool, and if so, what 
kind, will depend on a number of factors. Are you already 
committed to using something for managing lists and at- 
hand reference information? How do you want to see your 
reminders of actions, agendas, and projects? Where and 
how often do you need to review them? Because your head 
is not the place in which to hold things, you’ll obviously 
need something to manage your triggers and orient 
yourself externally. You could maintain everything ina 
purely low-tech fashion, by keeping pieces of paper in 
folders. Or you could even use a paper-based notebook or 
planner, or a digital version thereof. Or you could employ 
some combination of these. 

All of the low-tech gear listed in the previous section is 
used for various aspects of collecting, processing, and 
organizing. You'll use a tray and random paper for 
collecting. As you process your in-tray, you’ll complete many 
less-than-two-minute actions that will require Post-its, a 
stapler, and paper clips. The magazines, articles, and paper 
reports and documents that are your longer-than-two- 
minute reading will go in another of the trays. And you'll 
probably have quite a bit just to file away. What’s left— 
maintaining a project inventory, logging calendar items and 
action and agenda reminders, and tracking the things 
you’re waiting for—will require some form of lists, or 
reviewable groupings of similar items. 

Lists can be managed in a low-tech way, as pieces of 
paper kept in a file folder (e.g., separate sheets/notes for 
each person you need to call in a Calls file, or bills to pay in 


a To Pay folder or tray), or they can be arranged in a more 
mid-tech fashion, in loose-leaf notebooks or planners (a 
page titled Calls with the names listed down the sheet). Or 
they can be high-tech, digital versions (such as a Calls 
category in the Tasks or To-Do section of a software 
application). 

In addition to holding portable reference material (e.g., 
contact info) most organizing tools are designed for 
managing lists. (Your calendar is actually a form of a list, 
with time- and day-specific action reminders listed 
chronologically.) 


One of the best tricks for enhancing your productivity is having 
organizing tools you love to use. 


Probably thousands of types of organizers have been on 
the market since the latter twentieth century, from the 
early Day-Timers and Filofaxes, to the more sophisticated 
planners like Time/system and FranklinCovey, to the retro 
use of a simple Moleskine notebook, to the current flood of 
task-management software applications.- 

Should you implement the Getting Things Done process 
in what you’re currently using, or should you install 
something new? The answer is, do whichever one will 
actually help you change your behavior so you’ll use the 
tools appropriately. There are efficiency factors to consider 
here, too. Do you get a lot of digital information that would 
be easier to track with a digital tool? Do you need a paper- 
based calendar for all the appointments you have to make 
and change rapidly on the run? Where and how is the 
easiest way for you to be reminded of calls you need to 
make when you’re moving fast? And so on. There are also 
the aesthetic and enjoyment factors. I’ve done some of my 
best planning and updating for myself when I simply 


wanted some excuse to use (i.e., play with) my smartphone 
while waiting for dinner alone in a restaurant! 


If your reference system is not under control, it creates a blockage in 
your workflow that causes amorphous content to back up into your 
world. 


Keep in mind, though, that the tool you use will not give 
you stress-free productivity. That is something you create by 
implementing the GTD method. The structure you 
incorporate will be extremely important in how you express 
and implement the process, but it is not a substitute for it. A 
great hammer doesn’t make a great carpenter; but a great 
carpenter will always want to have a great hammer. 

When considering whether to get and use any organizing 
tool, and if so, which one, keep in mind that all you really 
need to do is manage lists. You’ve got to be able to create a 
list on the run and review it easily and as regularly as you 
need to. Once you know what to put on the lists and how to 
use them, the medium really doesn’t matter. Just go for 
simplicity, speed, and fun. 


The Critical Factor of a Filing System 


You will resist the whole process of capturing information if your 
reference systems are not fast, functional, and fun. 


A simple and highly functional personal reference system is 
critical to this process. The filing system at hand is one of 
the first things I assess before beginning the workflow 
process in anyone’s office. As I noted in chapter 2, the lack 
of a good general-reference system can be one of the 


greatest obstacles to implementing a personal management 
system, and for most of the executives I have coached, it 
represents one of the biggest opportunities for 
improvement. It’s not because the content is so important 
or strategic—it’s rather that, unmanaged, it inordinately 
clouds physical and mental space. Random nonactionable 
but potentially relevant material, unprocessed and 
unorganized, produces a debilitating psychological noise. 
More important, it produces a block in the “flow” part of 
workflow, and things tend to back up into the area like we 
see with clogged plumbing. Many times I have driven to the 
local office-supply store with a client and bought a filing 
cabinet, a big stack of file folders, and a labeler, just so we 
could create an appropriate place in which to put two- 
thirds of the stuff lying around his or her desk and office. 
The transformation in clarity and focus regarding work was 
inevitably dramatic. 

We’re concerned here mostly with general-reference 
filing—as distinct from discrete filing systems devoted to 
contracts, financial information, patient records, or other 
categories of data that deserve their own place and 
indexing. General-reference files should hold articles, 
brochures, pieces of paper, notes, printouts, documents, 
and even physical things like tickets, keys, buyers-club 
membership cards, and flash drives—basically anything that 
you want to keep for its interesting or useful data or 
purpose and that doesn’t fit into your specialized filing 
systems and won’t stand up by itself on a shelf (as will large 
software manuals and seminar binders). 

If you are a digitally oriented person, you may think 
there’s no longer any need for file folders for physical stuff. 
At some point in the future, I may not need a physical 
passport, birth certificate, older kitchen appliance 
instructions, medical records, keys for seldom-used boxes, 
or paper currency from countries I will revisit. But until 
then, I need a coordinated physical place to park them. 


To capture what you experience and sort it out... you must set up a 
file... . Whenever you feel strongly about events or ideas you must try 
not to let them pass from your mind, but instead to formulate them for 
your files and in so doing draw out their implications, show yourself 
how foolish these feelings or ideas are, or how they might be 
articulated into productive shape. 


—C. Wright Mills 


If you have a trusted secretary or assistant who 
maintains that system for you, so you can put a “File as X” 
Post-it on the document and send it out to him or her, great. 
But ask yourself if you have some potentially interesting, 
confidential, or useful support material that should be 
accessible at any moment, even when your assistant isn’t 
around. If so, you’ll still need your own system in your desk 
or somewhere near it. 

The same dynamic holds true, whether reference is in 
paper or digital form. As more and more information is 
coming to us virtually, the need to have general-reference 
locations for ad hoc data on your computer or mobile device 
is critical. Many people are still using their e-mail in-tray 
area as an amorphous general-reference storage place (“I 
need to keep this e-mail because it has information about 
my son’s school event schedule”), but they resist making an 
electronic folder named “Robert” or “School schedules” in 
their e-mail application in which to drag and store it, or 
copying and pasting it in a good reference storage program 
or database. Software is now available that allows 
capturing and categorizing this kind of information (and 
synchronizing it with multiple devices), but it does require 
some thought about how to structure it, as well as some 
directed behavior to flow this kind of stuff into appropriate 
places instead of complicating and confusing your digital 
environment. When I instituted a new general-reference 
filing application on my computer, it required a good three 


months of my experimentation to find the optimal way to 
organize it, and another three months to get it on “cruise 
control,” so now I’m just using it instead of thinking so 
much about it. 


Success Factors for Filing 


I strongly suggest that you maintain a personal, at-hand 
filing system—both physical and digital. It should take you 
less than one minute to pick something up out of your in- 
tray or print it from e-mail, decide it needs no next action 
but has some potential future value, and finish storing it in 
a trusted system. The same is true for scanning and storing 
documents or copying and pasting information in the 
computer. You may have a preponderance of digital over 
paper-based reference material (or vice versa), but without 
a streamlined system for both, you will resist keeping 
potentially valuable information, or what you do keep will 
accumulate in inappropriate places. If it takes longer than a 
minute to file something in an easily retrievable format, 
you'll likely stack it or stuff it somewhere instead. Besides 
being fast, the system needs to be fun and easy, current and 
complete. Otherwise you'll unconsciously resist emptying 
your in-tray because you know there’s likely to be 
something in there that ought to get filed, and you won’t 
even want to look at the papers or your clogged e-mail. 
Take heart: I’ve seen people go from resisting to actually 
enjoying sorting through their piles and digital world once 
their personal filing system is set up and humming. 

You must feel equally comfortable about filing a single 
piece of paper on a new topic—even a scribbled note—in its 
own file as you would about filing a more formal, larger 
document. Because it requires so much work to make and 
organize files, people either don’t keep them or have 
junked-up cabinets and drawers full of all sorts of one-of-a- 


kind items, like menus for the local takeout café or the 
current train schedule. If you trust that all that kind of 
information is instantly and virtually available through the 
Web and you would never need to access hard copies, then 
make sure you’re not duplicating systems unnecessarily, 
and that what you choose and how you use it is seamless. 

Whatever you need to do to get your reference system to 
that quick and easy standard for everything it has to hold, 
do it. My system works wonderfully for me and for many 
others who try it, and I highly recommend that you consider 
incorporating all of the following guidelines to really make 
reference filing automatic. 


Keep Your General-Reference Files Immediately at Hand 
Filing has to be instantaneous and easy. If you have to get 
up every time you have some ad hoc piece of paper you 
want to file, or you have to search multiple places on your 
computer for an appropriate location for a piece of 
information you want to keep, you'll tend to stack it or leave 
it in its original place instead of filing it. You’re also likely to 
resist the whole in-tray process (because you know there’s 
stuff in there that might need filing!). Many people I have 
coached have redesigned their office space so they have 
plenty of general-reference file drawers literally within 
swivel distance, instead of across the room. 


One Alpha System I have one A-Z alphabetical physical 
filing system for general reference, not multiple ones. My e- 
mail reference folders are also organized this way. People 
have a tendency to want to use their files as a personal 
management system, and therefore they attempt to 
organize them in groupings by projects or areas of focus. 
This magnifies geometrically the number of places 
something isn’t when you forget where you filed it. Once 
you have filtered all the reminders for actions into your 
next-action lists, this kind of data is simply the content of 


your personal library. You should have the freedom to be as 
much of a pack rat as you wish. The only issue you need to 
deal with is how much room you have for storage, and how 
accessible the information is when you need it. One simple 
alpha system files everything by topic, person, project, or 
company, so it can be in only three or four places if you 
forget exactly where you put it. You can usually put at least 
one subset of topics on each label, like “Gardening—pots” 
and “Gardening—ideas.” These would be filed under G. 


Using an effectively simple and easily accessible general-reference 
filing system gives you the freedom to keep as much information as 
you want. 


The digital world provides the advantage of the search 
function across a wide swath of your data, and the ability to 
tag content with key words adds even more capability for 
retrieval. However, with so many options and locations for 
data storage, that power also can easily add complexity and 
confusion. Most people I know who are even moderately 
busy won’t take the time and effort to use these tools to 
catalog all their stuff within all their possible applications. 
So, though the computer gives us great power and 
flexibility and opportunity for a great reference library, it 
creates an even greater challenge to design your own 
simple and effective formats for referential information. 
Even digitally, it is very helpful to have a visual map sorted 
in ways that make sense—either by indexes or data groups 
organized effectively, usually in an alpha format. To find 
restaurants in London that I like, I go my current general- 
reference application, where I find “Locales,” then 
“London,” then “Restaurants”—all alphabetized within each 
level of abstraction. 

The biggest issue for digitally oriented people is that the 
ease of capturing and storing has generated a write-only 


syndrome: all they’re doing is capturing information—not 
actually accessing and using it intelligently. Some 
consciousness needs to be applied to keep one’s potentially 
huge digital library functional, versus a black hole of data 
easily dumped in there with a couple of keystrokes. “I don’t 
need to organize my stuff, because the search feature can 
find it sufficiently” is, from what I’ve experienced, quite 
suboptimal as an approach. We need to have a way to 
overview our mass of collected information with some form 
of effective categorization. 

Every once in a while someone has such a huge amount 
of reference material on one topic or project that it should 
be put in its own discrete drawer, cabinet, or digital 
directory. But if the physical material is less than half a file 
drawer’s worth, I recommend including it in the single 
general alphabetical system. And if it is a digital grouping, it 
perhaps deserves its own place as a subdirectory. 


Make It Easy to Create a New Folder I keep a large supply 
of new file folders instantly at hand and reachable from 
where I sit to process my in-tray. Nothing is worse than 
having something to file and not having plenty of folders to 
grab from to make the process easy. Always ensure a supply 
within reach. The virtual version of this is getting 
comfortable with how to instantly create a new directory in 
your data-storage software as needed. 


Make Sure You Have Plenty of Space for Easy Storage 
Always try to keep your physical file drawers less than 
three-quarters full. If they’re stuffed, you’ll unconsciously 
resist putting things in there, and reference materials will 
tend to stack up instead. If a drawer is starting to get tight, 
I may purge it while I’m on hold on the phone. If you have 
any attention on the storage room in your digital devices, 
it’s a good time to review and purge. 


I know almost no one who doesn’t have overstuffed file 
drawers. If you value your cuticles, and if you want to get 
rid of your unconscious resistance to filing, then you must 
keep the drawers loose enough that you can insert and 
retrieve files without effort. The digital version of this is 
having any concern about space on the computer or in the 
cloud. A judgment call you consistently have to make is how 
much room to give yourself so that the content remains 
meaningfully and easily accessible, without creating a black 
hole of an inordinate amount of information amorphously 
organized. At times when I’m on hold on the phone, I’m 
purging my e-mail folders and old document directories. 

Some people’s reaction to this is, “I’d have to buy more 
file cabinets!” or “I’d have to get a larger hard drive!” as if 
that were something horrible. But if the stuff is worth 
keeping, it’s worth keeping so that it’s easily accessible, 
right? And if it’s not, then why are you keeping it? If we’re 
in the Information Age, and you’re doing anything that 
hinders your usage of it... not smart. 

You may need to create another tier of reference storage 
to give yourself sufficient working room with your general- 
reference files at hand. Material such as finished project 
notes and “dead” client files may still need to be kept, but 
they can be stored off-site, on storage drives, in the cloud, 
or at least out of your workspace. 


Label Your File Folders with an Auto Labeler No matter 
how small your inventory of physical reference materials is, 
you need to stay positively engaged with it. Typeset labels 
change the nature of your physical files and your 
relationship to them. Labeled files feel comfortable on a 
boardroom table; everyone can identify them; you can 
easily see what they are from a distance and in your 
briefcase; and when you open your file drawers, you get to 
see what looks almost like a printed index of your files in 


alphabetical order. It makes it fun to open the drawer to 
find or insert things. 


Things you name, you own. Collected but unnamed stuff owns you. 


Perhaps later in this new millennium the brain scientists 
will give us some esoteric and complex neurological 
explanation for why labeled files work so effectively. Until 
then, trust me. Get a labeler. And get your own. To make 
the whole system work without a hitch, you’ll need to have 
it at hand all the time, so you can file something whenever 
you want. And don’t share! If you have something to file and 
your labeler’s not there, you'll just stack the material 
instead of filing it. The labeler should be as basic a tool as 
your stapler. 


In the fire zone of real work, if it takes longer than sixty seconds to file 
something where it belongs, you won’t file, you’ll “stack.” 


Purge Your Files at Least Once a Year Cleaning house in 
your files regularly keeps them from going stale and 
seeming like a black hole, and it also gives you the freedom 
to keep anything on a whim “in case you might need it.” You 
know everything will be reassessed within a few months 
anyway, and you can redecide then what’s worth keeping 
and what isn’t. This applies equally to digital as well as 
paper-based reference information. As I said, I purge my 
files while I’m on hold on the phone (or marking time on a 
conference call that’s dragging on and on!). 

I recommend that all organizations (if they don’t have 
one already) establish a “purge day,” when all employees 
get to come to work in jeans, put their phone on do-not- 
disturb, and get current with all their stored stuff.* Large 


trash bins, recycle containers, and “to shred” boxes are 
available, and everyone has permission to spend the whole 
day in purge mode—around their office and on their 
computer. A personal purge day is an ideal thing to put into 
your tickler file, either during the holidays, at year’s end, or 
around early spring tax-preparation time, when you might 
want to tie it in with archiving the previous year’s financial 
files. 


Filing as a Success Factor Itself 


Reference and support materials seldom are associated 
with urgency, nor are they strategic, in the grand scheme of 
things. Hence their management is very often relegated to 
a low priority, if dealt with at all. The problem, however, is 
that your mental and physical workspaces become cluttered 
with nonactionable but potentially relevant and useful stuff. 
“What is this?” “Why is this here?” “What should I do with 
this?” and “Where is what I need to access right now?” 
become subliminal voices plaguing the consciousness if this 
aspect of your world is not rigorously set up and 
maintained. 


Wherever items of different character or meaning are piled into the 
same location, it’s too much work to continually think about the nature 
of the contents, so your brain will go numb to the pile. 


Reference materials need to be contained and organized 
within their own discrete boundaries—physically and 
digitally—so that they don’t cloud other categories in your 
system, are available for a specific purpose, and can be 
accessed efficiently. Because they can be so voluminous, it is 
critical that they be easily managed for capturing, sorting, 
and accessing what you need, when you need it, and that 
they don’t get in the way of the more action-oriented 


components of your system. I have spent countless hours 
with some of the most sophisticated professionals in the 
world, assisting them in cleaning up and setting up a simple 
and functional reference system, and the results have often 
been phenomenal in freeing up their attention for the 
bigger things. 


One Final Thing to Prepare... 


You've blocked off some time, you’ve gotten a work area set 
up, and you’ve got the basic tools to start implementing the 
methodology. Now what? 

If you’ve decided to commit a certain amount of time to 
setting up your workflow system, there’s one more thing 
that you’ll need to do to make it maximally effective: you 
must clear the decks of any other commitments for the 
duration of the session. 

If there’s someone you absolutely need to call, or 
something your secretary has to handle for you or you have 
to check with your life partner about, do it now. Or make an 
agreement with yourself about when you will do it, and then 
put some reminder of that where you won’t miss it. It’s 
critical that your full attention be available for the work at 
hand. 

Almost without exception, when I sit down to begin 
coaching people, even though they’ve blocked out time and 
committed significant money to utilize me as a resource for 
that time, they still have things they’re going to have to do 
before we quit for the day, and they haven’t arranged for 
them yet in their own systems. “Oh, yeah, I’ve got to call 
this client back sometime today,” they’ll say, or “I have to 
check in with my spouse to see if he’s gotten the tickets for 
tonight.” It bespeaks a certain lack of awareness and 
maturity in our culture, I think, that so many sophisticated 


people are ignoring those levels of responsibility to their 
own consciousness, on an ongoing operational basis. 

So have you handled all that? Good. Now it’s time to 
gather representatives of all of your open loops into one 
place. 


Capturing: Corralling Your “Stuff” 


IN cHaPTER 21 Gescribed the basic procedures for capturing 
your potential work and meaningful input. This chapter will 
lead you in more detail through the process of getting all 
your incompletes, all your “stuff,” into one place—into “in.” 
That’s the critical first step in getting to the state of “mind 
like water.” Just gathering a few more things than you 
currently have will probably create a positive feeling for 
you. But if you can hang in there and really do the whole 
capturing process, 100 percent, it will change your 
experience dramatically and give you an important new 
reference point for being on top of your work and your 
world. 

When I coach a client through this process, the capture 
phase usually takes between one and six hours, though it 
did take an entire twenty hours with one person (finally I 
told him, “You get the idea”). It can take longer than you 
think if you are committed to a full-blown collection that will 
include everything at work and everywhere else. That 
means going through every storage area, including your 
computers, and every nook and cranny in every location, 
including cars, boats, and other garages and homes, if you 
have them. 


Until you’ve captured everything that has your attention, some part of 
you will still not totally trust that you’re working with the whole picture 
of your world. 


Be assured that if you give yourself at least a couple of 
hours to tackle this part, you can grab the major portion of 
things outstanding. And you can even capture the rest by 
creating relevant placeholding notes—for example, “Purge 
and process boat storage shed” and “Deal with hall closet.” 

In the real world, you probably won't be able to keep 
your stuff 100 percent collected all the time. If you’re like 
most people, you’ll move too fast and be engaged in too 
many things during the course of a week to get all your 
ideas and commitments captured outside your head. But it 
should become an ideal standard that keeps you motivated 
to consistently clean house of all the things about your work 
and life that have your attention. 


Ready, Set... 


There are very practical reasons to gather everything 
before you start clarifying it: 


You can only feel good about what you’re not doing when you know 
everything you’re not doing. 


It can be daunting to capture in one location, at one time, 
all the things that don’t belong where they are. It may even 
seem a little counterintuitive, because for the most part, 
most of that stuff was not, and is not, “that important”; 
that’s why it’s still lying around. It wasn’t an urgent thing 
when it first showed up, and probably nothing’s blown up 
yet because it hasn’t been dealt with. It’s the business card 
you put in your wallet of somebody you thought you might 
want to contact sometime. It’s the little piece of techno-gear 
in the bottom desk drawer that you’re missing a part for, or 


haven’t had the time to install properly. It’s the printer that 
you keep telling yourself you’re going to move to a better 
location in your office. These are the kinds of things that 
nag at you but that you haven’t decided either to deal with 
or to drop entirely from your list of open loops. But because 
you think there still could be something important in there, 
that stuff is controlling you and taking up more of your 
energy than it deserves. 

So it’s time to begin. Grab your in-tray and half-inch 
stack of plain paper for your notes, and let’s... 


... Go! 
Physical Gathering 


The first activity is to search your physical environment for 
anything that doesn’t permanently belong where it is, the 
way it is, and put it into your in-tray. You’ll be gathering 
things that are incomplete, things that have some decision 
about potential action tied to them. They all go into “in,” so 
they'll be available for later processing. 


What Stays Where It Is 


The best way to create a clean decision about whether 
something should go into the in-tray is to understand 
clearly what shouldn’t go in. Here are the four categories of 
things that can remain where they are, the way they are, 
with no action tied to them: 


Supplies 
Reference Material 
Decoration 
Equipment 


Supplies ... include anything you need to keep because you 
use it regularly. Stationery, business cards, stamps, staples, 
Post-it pads, paper clips, ballpoint refills, batteries, forms 
you need to fill out from time to time, rubber bands—all of 
these qualify. Many people also have a “personal supplies” 
drawer at work containing dental floss, Kleenex, breath 
mints, and so on. 


Reference Material ...is anything you simply keep for 
information as needed, such as manuals for your software, 
the local takeout deli menu, your kid’s sports team 
schedule, or your list of internal phone extensions. This 
category includes all your telephone and address 
information, any material relevant to projects, themes, and 
topics, and sources such as dictionaries, encyclopedias, 
almanacs, and bound archives of corporate records. It also 
includes books and magazines that you may be keeping as a 
library. 


Decoration ... means pictures of family, artwork, and fun 
and inspiring things pinned to your bulletin board. You also 
might have plaques, mementos, and/or plants. 


Equipment... is obviously your phone, computer, printer, 
scanner, wastebasket, furniture, clock, chargers, pens, and 
notepads. 


You no doubt have a lot of things that fall into these four 
categories—basically all your tools and your gear, which 
have no actions tied to them. Everything else goes into “in.” 
But many of the things you might initially interpret as 
supplies, reference, decoration, or equipment could also 
have action associated with them because they still aren’t 
exactly the way they need to be. 

For instance, most people have, in their desk drawers, on 
their shelves and bulletin boards, and tucked away in 


computer files a lot of materials and information that either 
are out of date or need to be organized somewhere else. 
Those should go into “in.” Likewise, if your supplies drawer 
is out of control, full of lots of dead or unorganized stuff, 
that’s an incomplete that needs to be captured. Are the 
photos of your kids current ones? Is the artwork what you 
want on the wall? Are the mementos really something you 
still want to keep? Is the furniture precisely the way it 
should be? Is the computer set up the way you want it? Are 
the plants in your office alive? In other words, supplies, 
reference materials, decoration, and equipment may need 
to be tossed into the in-tray if they’re not just where they 
should be, the way they should be. 


Issues About Capturing 


As you engage in the capturing step, you may run into one 
or more of the following: 


e you’ve got a lot more than will fit into one in-tray; 

e you’re likely to get derailed into purging and 
organizing; 

e you may have some form of stuff already collected and 
organized; and/or 

e you're likely to run across some critical things that you 
want to keep in front of you. 


What If an Item Is Too Big to Go in the In-Tray? If you can’t 
physically put something in the in-tray, then write a note on 
a piece of letter-size plain paper to represent it. For 
instance, if you have a poster or other piece of artwork 
behind the door to your office, just write “Artwork behind 
door” on a letter-size piece of paper and put the paper in 
the in-tray. 


Be sure to date it, too. This has a couple of benefits. If 
your organization system winds up containing some of 
these pieces of paper representing something else, it’ll be 
useful to know when the note was created. It’s also just a 
great habit to date everything you handwrite, from Post-it 
notes for your assistant, to voice mails you transfer onto a 
pad, to the note you take on a phone call with a client. If you 
are using a digital tool that has a date-stamp function, it’s 
great to use that for the same reason. The 3 percent of the 
time that this little piece of information will be extremely 
useful makes it worth developing the simple habit. 


What If the Pile Is Too Big to Fit into the In-Tray? If you’re 
like 98 percent of the people we work with individually, your 
initial gathering activity will collect much more than can be 
comfortably stacked in an in-tray. If that’s the case, just 
create stacks around the in-tray, and maybe even on the 
floor below it. Ultimately you'll be eliminating the stacks, as 
you process and organize everything. In the meantime, 
though, make sure that there’s some obvious visual 
distinction between the stacks that are “in” and everything 
else. 


Instant Dumping If it’s immediately evident that something 
is trash, go ahead and toss it when you see it. For some of 
my clients, this marks the first time they have ever cleaned 
their center desk drawer! 

If you’re not sure what something is or whether it’s 
worth keeping, go ahead and put it into “in.” You’ll be able 
to decide about it later, when you process the in-tray. What 
you don’t want to do is to let yourself get wrapped up in 
things piece-by-piece, trying to decide this or that. 
Clarifying requires a very different mind-set than 
capturing; it’s best to do them separately. You’ll process 
your stuff later anyway if it’s in “in,” and it’s easier to make 
those kinds of choices when you’re in that decision-making 


mode. The objective for the capturing process is to get 
everything into “in” as quickly as possible so you’re 
appropriately retrenched and have “drawn the battle lines.” 


No person who can read is ever successful at cleaning out an attic. 


—Ann Landers 


Be Careful of the Purge-and-Organize Bug! Many people 
get hit with the purge-and-organize virus as they’re going 
through various areas of their office (and their home). If 
that happens to you, it’s OK, so long as you have a major 
open window of time to get through the whole process (at 
least a whole week). Otherwise you'll need to break it up 
into chunks and capture them as little projects or actions to 
do, with reminders in your system, like “Purge four-drawer 
cabinet” or “Clean office closet.” 

What you don’t want to do is let yourself get caught 
running down a rabbit trail cleaning up some piece of your 
work and then not be able to get through the whole action- 
management implementation process. It may take longer 
than you think, and you want to go for the gold and finish 
processing all your stuff and setting up your system as soon 
as possible. 


What About Things That Are Already on Lists and in 
Organizers? You may already have some lists and some sort 
of organization system in place. But unless you’re 
thoroughly familiar with this workflow-processing model 
and have implemented it previously, I recommend that you 
treat those lists as items still to be processed, like 
everything else in “in.” You'll want your system to be 
consistent, and it’ll be necessary to evaluate everything 
from the same viewpoint to get it that way.- 


“But I Can’t Lose That Thing... !” Often in the capturing 
process someone will run across a piece of paper or a 
document that causes her to say, “Oh, my God! I forgot 
about that! I’ve got to deal with that!” It could be a note 
about a call she was supposed to handle two days before, or 
some meeting notes that remind her of an action she was 
supposed to take weeks ago. She doesn’t want to put 
whatever it is in the huge stack of other stuff in her in-tray 
because she’s afraid she might lose track of it again. 

If that happens to you, first ask yourself if it’s something 
that really has to be handled before you get through this 
initial implementation time. If so, best deal with it 
immediately so you get it off your mind. If not, go ahead and 
put it into “in.” You’re going to get all that processed and 
emptied soon anyway, so it won’t be lost. 

If you can’t deal with the action in the moment, and you 
still just have to have the reminder right in front of you, go 
ahead and create an “emergency” stack somewhere close 
at hand. It’s not an ideal solution, but it’1l do. Keep in mind 
that some potential anxiousness is going to surface as you 
make your stuff more conscious to you than it’s been. 
Create whatever supports you need. 


Start with Your Desktop 


Ready now? OK. Start piling those things on your desk into 
“in.” Often there’ll be numerous things right at hand that 
need to go in there. Many people use their whole desktop 
as “in”; if you’re one of them, you’ll have several stacks 
around you to begin your collection with. Start at one end 
of your workspace and move around, dealing with 
everything you come across. Typical items will be: 


e Stacks of mail, memos, reports, reading materials 
¢ Post-it notes 


e Collected business cards 
e Receipts 
e Meeting notes 


It’s easy to resist and avoid picking up anything in your world that you 
know requires some thinking. 


Resist the urge to say, as almost everyone does initially, 
“Well, I know what’s in that stack, and that’s where I want 
to leave it.” That’s exactly what hasn’t worked before, and it 
all needs to go into the in-tray. I have never had anyone who 
gave in and actually put their familiar stacks through this 
system who didn’t feel a ton of relief when they did. 

As you go around your desktop, ask yourself if you have 
any intention of changing any of the tools or equipment 
there. Are your mobile devices and phone system OK? Your 
computer? The desk itself? If anything needs changing, 
write a note about it and toss it into “in.” 


Desk Drawers 


Next tackle the desk drawers, if you have them, one ata 
time. Any attention on anything in there? Any actionable 
items? Is there anything that doesn’t belong there? If the 
answer to any of these questions is yes, put the actionable 
item into “in” or write a note about it. Again, whether you 
use this opportunity to clean and organize the drawers or 
simply make a note to do it later will depend on how much 
time you have and how much stuff is in there. 


Countertops 


Continue working your way around your office, collecting 
everything sitting on the tops of cabinets or tables or 


counters that doesn’t belong there permanently. Often 
there will be stacks of reading material, mail, reports, and 
miscellaneous folders and support material for action and 
projects. Collect it all. 

Maybe there is reference material that you’ve already 
used and just left out. If that’s so, and if you can return it to 
the file cabinet or the bookshelf in just a second, go ahead 
and do that. Be careful to check with yourself, though, 
about whether there is some potential action tied to the 
material before you put it away. If there is, put it into “in” so 
you can deal with it later in the process. 


Inside the Cabinets 


Consider whether your collectible and nostalgia items are still 
meaningful to you. 


Now look inside the cabinets. What’s in there? These are 
perfect areas for stashing large supplies and reference 
materials, and equally seductive for holding deeper levels of 
stuff. Any broken or out-of-date things in there? Often I’ll 
find collectibles and nostalgia that aren’t meaningful to the 
person any longer. One general manager of an insurance 
office, for example, wound up tossing out at least three 
dozen recognition awards he had accumulated over the 
years. 

Again, if some of these areas are out of control and need 
purging and organizing, write that on a note and toss it into 


as yw 
. 


mM 


Floors, Walls, and Shelves 


Anything on bulletin boards that needs action? Anything 
tacked onto the walls that doesn’t belong there? Any 


attention on your pictures, artwork, plaques, or 
decorations? How about the open shelves? Any books that 
need to be read or donated? Any catalogs, manuals, or 
binders that are out of date or have some potential action 
associated with them? Any piles or stacks of things on the 
floor? Just scoot them over next to your in-tray to add to the 
inventory. 


Equipment, Furniture, and Fixtures 


Is there anything you want to do to or change about any of 
your office equipment or furniture or the physical space 
itself? Does everything work? Do you have all the lighting 
you need? If there are actionable items, you know what to 
do: make a note and put it in “in.” 


Other Locations 


Don’t let things to be handled that you have considered “not so 
important” gnaw away at your energy and focus. 


Depending on the scope of what you’re addressing in this 
process, you may want to do some version of the same kind 
of gathering anywhere else you keep stuff. As I mentioned 
in the previous chapter, if you’re determined to get toa 
really empty head, it’s imperative you do it everywhere. 

Some people I work with find it immensely valuable to 
take me home with them, or to a second office location, and 
have me walk them through this process there as well. 
Often they’ve allowed the “not so important” trap to 
ensnare them in their home life and secondary workspaces, 
and it has gnawed away at their energy. 


This Is Not About Throwing Things Away That You 
Might Want 


People often mistake my advice as an advocacy for radical 
minimalism. On the contrary, if throwing something away is 
uncomfortable for you, you should keep it.* Otherwise you 
would have attention on the fact that you now don’t have 
something you might want or need. My counsel is how to 
assess and organize whatever you keep in your ecosystem 
so that it doesn’t pull on your focus unnecessarily. In many 
areas I’m a confirmed pack rat (such as with digital photos). 
The issues are simply how much room you have, and that 
you have made the appropriate distinctions that don’t leave 
embedded projects and actions submerged in what you’re 
keeping. You like having and keeping your twelve boxes of 
old journals and notes from college? You like keeping all 
kinds of nutty toys and artwork and gadgets around your 
office to spur creative thinking? No problem, as long as 
they are where you want them to be, in the form they’re in, 
and you have anything you want or need to do about that 
captured and processed in your system. 


Mental Gathering: The Mind Sweep 


Once you feel you’ve collected all the physical things in your 
environment that need processing, you'll want to collect 
anything else that may be residing in your mental RAM 
space. What has your attention that isn’t represented by 
something already in your in-tray? 

This is where the stack of plain paper really comes into 
play. I recommend that you write out each thought, each 
idea, each project or thing that has your attention, ona 
separate sheet of paper. You could make one long list on a 
pad, or in some digital application, but given how you will 
later be processing each item individually, it’s actually more 


effective on separate sheets. There is a discipline required 
initially to stay focused on one item at a time, as you 
process it. So giving each thought its own placeholder, as 
trivial as it might seem, makes it that much easier. And your 
first captured thought will seldom be the final content you’ll 
want to track about it (the desired outcome and next action 
for it will be). You will likely not keep these pieces of paper, 
but it’ll be handy to have them as discrete items to deal 
with as you’re processing.~ 

It will probably take you between twenty minutes and an 
hour to clear your head onto separate notes, after you’ve 
gathered everything else. You'll find that things will tend to 
occur to you in somewhat random fashion—little things, big 
things, personal things, professional things, in no particular 
order. 

In this instance, go for quantity. It’s much better to 
overdo this process than to risk missing something. You can 
always toss the junk later. Your first idea may be 
“Implement global climate change,” and then you'll think, “I 
need cat food!” Grab them all. Don’t be surprised if you 
discover you’ve created quite a stack of paper in “in” during 
this procedure. 


Triggers List 


To assist in clearing your head, you may want to review the 
following Incompletion Triggers list, item by item, to see if 
you’ve forgotten anything. Often you'll just need a jog to 
unearth something lurking in the back of your mind. 
Remember, when something occurs to you, write it on a 
piece of paper and toss it into “in.” 


Incompletion Triggers 
Professional 


Projects started, not completed 
Projects that need to be started 


“Look into...” projects 
Commitments/promises to others 
Boss/partners 
Colleagues 
Subordinates 
Others in organization 
“Outside” people 
Customers 
Other organizations 
Professionals 
Vendors 
Communications to make/get 
Internal/external 
Initiate or respond to: 
Phone calls 
Voice mails 
E-mails 
Text messages 
Letters 
Social media postings 
Other writing to finish/submit 
Reports 
Evaluations/reviews 
Proposals 
Articles 
Marketing materials 
Manuals/instructions 
Summaries 
Rewrites and edits 
Status reporting 
Conversation and communication tracking 
Meetings that need to be set/requested 
Who needs to know about what decisions? 
Significant read/review 
Financial 
Cash 
Budgets 
Forecasts/projections 
Profit and loss 
Balance sheet 
Forecasting 
Credit line 
Banks 
Receivables 
Payables 
Petty cash 
Investors 
Asset management 


Planning/organizing 
Formal planning (goals, targets, objectives) 
Current projects (next stages) 
Business plans 
Marketing plans 
Financial plans 
Organizational initiatives 
Upcoming events 
Meetings 
Presentations 
Conferences 
Organizational structuring 
Changes in facilities 
Installation of new systems/equipment 
Travel 
Vacation 
Business trips 

Organization Development 
Organization chart 
Restructuring 
Roles 
Job descriptions 
Facilities 
New systems 
Leadership 
Change initiatives 
Succession planning 
Organization culture 

Marketing/promotion 
Campaigns 
Materials 
Public relations 

Administration 
Legal 
Insurance 
Personnel 
Staffing 
Policies/procedures 
Training 

Staff 
Hiring/firing/promoting 
Reviews 
Communication 
Staff development 
Compensation 
Feedback 
Morale 

Sales 


Customers 
Prospects 
Leads 
Sales process 
Training 
Relationship building 
Reporting 
Relationship tracking 
Customer service 
Systems 
Mobile devices 
Phones 
Computers 
Software 
Databases 
Telecommunications 
Internet 
Filing and reference 
Inventories 
Storage 
Office/site 
Space/arrangements 
Furniture 
Equipment 
Decorations 
Utilities 
Supplies 
Maintenance/cleaning 
Security 
Meetings 
Upcoming 
Needing to be set/requested 
Need debriefing 
Professional development 
Training/seminars 
Things to learn 
Things to find out 
Skills to practice/develop 
Books to read/study 
Research 
Formal education (licensing, degrees) 
Career research 
Résumé 
Performance objectives 
Professional wardrobe 
Waiting for... 
Information 
Delegated tasks/projects 


Completions critical to projects 
Answers to questions 
Replies to: 

E-mails 

Letters 

Proposals 

Calls 

Invitations 
Requisitions 
Reimbursements 
Insurance claims 
Ordered items 
Repairs 
Tickets 
Decisions of others 


Personal 
Projects started, not completed 
Projects that need to be started 
Projects—other organizations 

Service 

Community 

Volunteer 

Spiritual organization 
Commitments/promises to others 

Partner/spouse 

Children 

Parents 

Family 

Friends 

Professionals 

Returnable items 

Debts 
Communications to make/get 

Calls 

E-mails 

Cards and letters 

Thank-yous 

Texts 

Social media postings 
Upcoming events 

Birthdays 

Anniversaries 

Weddings 

Graduations 

Receptions 

Outings 


Holidays 
Vacation 
Travel 
Dinners 
Parties 
Cultural events 
Sporting events 
Administration 
Home office supplies 
Equipment 
Phones 
Mobile devices 
Audio/video media 
Voice mail 
Computers 
Software 
Internet 
Filing and records 
Data storage/backup 
Leisure 
Books 
Music 
Video 
Travel 
Places to visit 
People to visit 
Web browsing 
Photography 
Sports equipment 
Hobbies 
Cooking 
Recreation 
Financial 
Bills 
Banks 
Investments 
Loans 
Taxes 
Budget 
Insurance 
Mortgage 
Bookkeeping 
Accountants 
Pets 
Health 
Training 
Supplies 
Legal 


Wills 
Trusts 
Estate 
Legal affairs 
Family projects/activities 
Partner/spouse 
Children 
Parents 
Relatives 
Home/household 
Real estate 
Repairs 
Construction 
Remodeling 
Landlords 
Heating and air conditioning 
Plumbing 
Utilities 
Roof 
Landscaping 
Driveway 
Garage 
Walls 
Floors 
Ceilings 
Decor 
Furniture 
Appliances 
Lights and wiring 
Kitchen supplies/equipment 
Laundry 
Purging, organizing, cleaning 
Storage 
Service providers 
Health 
Doctors 
Dentist 
Optometrist 
Healthcare specialists 
Checkups 
Diet 
Food 
Exercise 
Personal development 
Classes 
Seminars 
Education 
Coaching/counseling 


Career 
Creative expressions 
Transportation 
Motor vehicles 
Bicycles 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Commuting 
Clothes 
Professional 
Casual 
Formal 
Sports 
Accessories 
Luggage 
Repairs 
Tailoring 
Errands 
Shopping 
Stores 
Hardware 
Supplies 
Groceries 
Gifts 
Pharmacy 
Bank 
Cleaners 
Repairs 
Community 
Neighborhood 
Neighbors 
Service 
Schools 
Civic involvement 
Voting 
Waiting for 
Product orders 
Repairs 
Reimbursements 
Loaned items 
Information 
RSVPs 
Projects/tasks completed by family/friends 


The “In” Inventory 


Capturing is complete when you can easily see the outer edges to the 
inventory of everything that still has some of your attention in any 
Way. 


If your head is empty of everything, personally and 
professionally, then your in-tray is probably quite full and 
likely spilling over. In addition to the paper-based and 
physical items in your in-tray, your inventory of “in” should 
include any resident voice mails and all the e-mails that are 
currently staged in the “in” area of your communication 
software. It should also include any items on your organizer 
lists for which you have not yet determined next actions. 

I usually recommend that people transfer their voice 
mails onto paper notes and put those into their in-trays, 
along with any organizer notebooks they may have used, 
the contents of which often need significant reassessment. 
If you’ve been using a digital application for anything other 
than calendar and contact information, I suggest you print 
out any task and to-do lists and put them, too, into your in- 
tray. E-mails are best left where they are, because of their 
volume and the efficiency factor of dealing with them within 
their own subsystem. 


But “In” Doesn’t Stay in “In” 


When you’ve done all that, you’re ready to take the next 
step. You don’t want to leave anything in “in” for an 
indefinite period of time, because then it would without fail 
creep back into your consciousness, since your mind would 
know you weren't dealing with it. Of course, one of the main 
factors in people’s resistance to collecting stuff into “in” is 
the lack of a good processing and organizing methodology 
to handle it. 


That brings us to the next chapter: “Getting ‘In’ to 
Empty.” 


Clarifying: Getting “In” to Empty 


AssuMING THAT You have collected everything that has your 
attention, your job now is to actually get to the bottom of 
“in.” Getting “in” to empty doesn’t mean actually doing all 
the actions and projects that you’ve captured. It just means 
identifying each item and deciding what it is, what it means, 
and what you’re going to do with it. 

To get an overview of this process, you may find it useful 
here to refer to the Workflow Diagram on page 123. The 
center column illustrates all the steps involved in 
processing and deciding your next actions. 

This chapter focuses on the components in the diagram’s 
center column, the steps from “in” to next action. You'll 
immediately see the natural organization that results from 
following this process for each of your open loops. For 
instance, if you pick up something from “in” and realize, 
“I’ve got to call Andrea about that, but I’ve got to do it on 
Monday, when she’s in her office,” then you’ll defer that 
action immediately and enter it on your calendar for 
Monday. 

I recommend that you read through this chapter and the 
next one, on organizing your actions, before you actually 
start processing what you’ve captured in “in.” It may save 
you some steps. When I coach people through this process, 
it invariably becomes a dance back and forth between the 
simple decision-making stage of processing the open loops 


and the trickier task of figuring out the best way to enter 
these decisions in their particular organization systems. 


“stuff ” 
Vv 


| 


aC Trash } 
a 


Someday/ 


Is it actionable? 4 maybe 
> NiO {tickler file; hold 
Vv 
Firs iacie Multistep | Reference 
se nina (retrievable 
| j \ 
Oi What’s the when required} 
Po next action? 


Project plans 


for review} 











{review for actions} Will it take less than 2 minutes? 


yes no 


! J 


Waiting ( Calendar Next actions 
{for someone else to do} i do at a specific time} {to do as soon as | can} 























WORKFLOW DIAGRAM—PROCESSING 


Many of the people we work with, for example, are eager 
to get set up on a mobile device that might synchronize 
with the enterprise application that their company is using 
for e-mail and scheduling. The first thing we would have to 
do (after we’ve collected the in-tray) is make sure all their 
hardware and software are working. Then we clean up 
(print out and erase, usually) everything they have 
previously tried to organize in their task lists and put it all 
into “in.” Then we establish some working categories such 
as “Calls,” “Errands,” “Agendas,” “At Computer,” and so on. 
As we begin to process the in-tray, the person can go 
immediately to his computer and type his action steps 
directly into the system he will ultimately depend on. 

If you’re not sure yet what you’re going to be using asa 
personal reminder system, don’t worry. You can begin very 
appropriately with a simple loose-leaf notebook or whatever 
you may be currently using for making lists. You can always 
upgrade your tools later, once you have your system in 
place. 


Processing Guidelines 


The best way to learn this model is by doing. But there are 
a few basic rules to follow: 


e Process the top item first. 
e Process one item at a time. 
e Never put anything back into “in.” 


Top Item First 


Process does not mean “spend time on.” 


Even if the second item down is a personal note to you from 
the head of your country and the top item is a piece of junk 
mail, you’ve got to process the junk mail first! That’s an 
exaggeration to make a point, but the principle is an 
important one: everything gets processed equally. The verb 
process does not mean “spend time on.” It just means 
“decide what the thing is and what action is required, and 
then dispatch it accordingly.” You’re going to get to the 
bottom of the tray as soon as you can anyway, and you don’t 
want to avoid dealing with anything in there. 


Emergency Scanning Is Not Clarifying 


Most people get to their in-tray or their e-mail and look for 
the most urgent, most fun, easiest, or most interesting stuff 
to deal with first. “Emergency scanning” is fine and 
necessary sometimes (I do it regularly, too). Maybe you’ve 
just come back from an off-site meeting and have to be ona 
long conference call in fifteen minutes. So you check to 
make sure there are no land mines about to explode and to 
see if your client has e-mailed back to you OK’ing the big 
proposal. 

But that’s not processing your in-tray; it’s emergency 
scanning. When you’re in processing mode, you must get 
into the habit of starting at one end and just cranking 
through items one at a time, in order. As soon as you break 
that rule and process only what you feel like processing, in 
whatever order, you’ll invariably begin to leave things 
unprocessed. Then you will no longer have a functioning 
funnel, and it will back up all over your desk and office and 
e-mail “in” repositories. Many people live in this 
emergency-scanning mode, always distracted by what’s 
coming into “in,” and not feeling comfortable if they’re not 
constantly skimming the contents on their computer or 
mobile devices. Were they to trust “in” would be totally 


dealt with every day or two, they wouldn’t be so driven by 
this need for incessant checking. 


LIFO or FIFO? 


The in-tray is a processing station, not a storage bin. 


Theoretically you should flip your in-tray upside down and 
process first the first thing that came in. As long as you go 
from one end clear through to the other within a 
reasonable period of time, though, it won’t make much 
difference. You’re going to see it all in short order anyway. 
And if you’re going to attempt to clear up a big backlog of e- 
mails staged in “in,” you’ll actually discover it’s more 
efficient to process the last-in first because of all the 
discussion threads that accumulate on top of one another, 
and you don’t want to respond to something prematurely 
before you’ve seen the whole discussion. 


One Item at a Time 


You may find you have a tendency, while processing your in- 
tray, to pick something up, not know exactly what you want 
to do about it, and then let your eyes wander to another 
item farther down the stack and get engaged with it. That 
item may be more attractive to you because you know right 
away what to do with it—and you don’t feel like thinking 
about what’s in your hand. This is dangerous territory. 
What’s in your hand is likely to land on a “hmph” stack on 
the side of your desk because you become distracted by 
something easier, more important, or more interesting 
below it. 


Thinking about the stuff you’ve accumulated usually does not happen 
naturally, of its own accord. You must apply conscious effort to get 
yourself to think, like getting yourself to exercise or clean house. 


Most people also want to take a whole stack of things out 
of the in-tray at once, put it right in front of them, and try to 
crank through it all, immediately. Although I empathize with 
the desire to deal with a big chunk, I constantly remind 
people to put back everything but the one item on top. The 
focus on just one thing forces the requisite attention and 
decision making to get through all your stuff. And if you get 
interrupted (which is likely), you won’t have countless parts 
of “in” scattered around outside the tray and out of control 
again. 


The Multitasking Exception 


There’s a subtle exception to the one-item-at-a-time rule. 
Some personality types really need to shift their focus away 
from something for at least a minute in order to make a 
decision about it. When I see this going on with someone, I 
let him take two or sometimes three things out at once as 
he’s processing. It’s then easier and faster for him to make 
a choice about the action required. 

Remember, multitasking is an exception—and it works 
only if you hold to the discipline of working through every 
item in short order, and never avoid any decision for longer 
than a minute or two. 


Nothing Goes Back into “In” 


There’s a one-way path out of “in.” This is actually what was 
meant by the old admonition to “handle things once,” 
though handling things just once is in fact a bad idea. If you 


did that, you’d never have a list, because you would finish 
everything as soon as you Saw it. You’d also be highly 
ineffective and inefficient, since most things you deal with 
are not to be acted upon the first time you become aware of 
them. Where the advice does hold is in eliminating the bad 
habit of continually picking things up out of “in,” not 
deciding what they mean or what you’re going to do about 
them, and then just leaving them there. A better admonition 
would be, “The first time you pick something up from your 
in-tray, decide what to do about it and where it goes. Never 
put it back in ‘in.’” 

The cognitive scientists have now proven the reality of 
“decision fatigue”—that every decision you make, little or 
big, diminishes a limited amount of your brain power. 
Deciding to “not decide” about an e-mail or anything else is 
another one of those decisions, which drains your 
psychological fuel tank. 


The Key Processing Question: “What’s the 
Next Action?” 


I am rather like a mosquito in a nudist camp; I know what I want to do, 
but I don’t know where to begin. 


—Stephen Bayne 


You’ve got the message. You’re going to deal with one item 
at a time. And you’re going to make a firm next-action 
decision about each one. This may sound easy—and it is— 
but it requires you to do some fast, hard thinking. Much of 
the time the action will not be self-evident; it will need to be 
determined. 

On that first item, for example, do you need to call 
someone? Fill something out? Get information from the 


Web? Buy something at the store? Talk to your assistant? E- 
mail your boss? What? If there’s an action, its specific 
nature will determine the next set of options. But what if 
you Say, “There’s really nothing to do with this”? 


What If There Is No Action? 


It’s likely that a portion of your in-tray will require no 
action. There will be three types of things in this category: 


e Trash 
¢« Items to incubate 
e Reference material 


Trash 


If you’ve been following my suggestions, you'll no doubt 
already have tossed out a big pile of stuff. It’s also likely that 
you will have put stacks of material into “in” that include 
things you don’t need anymore. So don’t be surprised if 
there’s still a lot more to throw away as you process your 
stuff. 

Processing all the things in your world will make you 
more conscious of what you are going to do and what you 
should not be doing. One director of a foundation I worked 
with discovered that he had allowed way too many e-mails 
(thousands!) to accumulate—e-mails that in fact he wasn’t 
ever going to respond to anyway. He told me that using my 
method forced him to “go on a healthy diet” about what he 
would allow to hang around his world as an incompletion. 

It’s likely that at some point you'll come up against the 
question of whether or not to keep something for future 
reference. I have two ways of dealing with that: 


e When in doubt, throw it out. 


e When in doubt, keep it. 


Take your pick. I think either approach is fine. You just 
need to trust your intuition and be realistic about your 
space. Most people have some angst about all of this 
because their systems have never really been totally 
functional and clear-edged before. If you make a clean 
distinction between what’s reference and supplies and what 
requires action, and if your reference system is simple and 
workable, you can easily keep as much material as you can 
accommodate. Since no action is required on it, it’s justa 
matter of physical space and logistics. How big would you 
like your reference library and toolbox to be? 


Too much information creates the same result as too little: you don’t 
have what you need, when and in the way you need it. 


Filing experts can offer you more detailed guidelines 
about all this, and your accountant can provide record- 
retention timetables that will tell you how long you should 
keep what kinds of financial documentation. My suggestion 
is that you discriminate about whether something is 
actionable or not. Once it’s clear that no action is needed, 
there’s room for lots of options, given your personal 
preferences and storage and access capabilities. 

The digital world offers additional opportunities and 
challenges around the what-to-keep vs. what-to-throw-away 
decision. Because computer and cloud storage spaces seem 
continually to grow exponentially, the good news is that we 
are forever getting much more room to store much more 
stuff. Additional good news is the powerful search 
functionality that has grown along with it. The bad news is 
that it can easily foster indiscriminate filing and a lot of 
numbness to the volume and confusion about where things 


are, even as good as search functions might be. Because 
digital storage, without much forethought, has become 
almost automatic, it is very possible to create an 
environment of constant input but no utilization. You are 
creating a library so big and overwhelming, you have 
limited your capacity to make it functional for the work 
that’s important for you to do. The key here is the regular 
reviewing and purging of outdated information, as I 
suggested in a previous chapter, as well as more conscious 
filtering on the front end, as you’re processing your input: 
“Ts this really necessary or useful for me to keep, or can I 
trust that I can access it from the Internet or other sources 
if I need it?” 


Incubate 


There will probably be things in your in-tray about which 
you will say to yourself, “There’s nothing to do on this now, 
but there might be later.” Examples of this would be: 


e An e-mail announcing a chamber of commerce 
breakfast with a guest speaker you might want to hear, 
but it’s two weeks away, and you’re not sure yet if you'll 
be at home then or out of town on a business trip. 

e An agenda for a board meeting you’ve been invited to 
attend in three weeks. No action is required on it, other 
than your briefing yourself a day ahead of the meeting 
by reading the agenda. 

e An advertisement for the next software upgrade for one 
of your favorite applications. Do you really need this 
next version? You don’t know; you’d rather sleep on it 
for another week. 

e An idea you had about something you might want to do 
for next year’s annual sales meeting. There’s nothing to 


do on this now, but you’d like to be reminded when the 
time comes to start planning for it. 

e A note to yourself about taking a watercolor class, 
which you have zero time for right now. 


What do you do with these kinds of things? There are two 
options that could work: 


e Write them on a Someday/Maybe list. 
e Put a reminder of them on your calendar or in a tickler 
file. 


It’s fine to decide not to decide about something. You just need a 
decide-not-to-decide system to get it off your mind. 


The point of all of these incubation procedures is that 
they give you a way to get the items off your mind right now 
and let you feel confident that some reminder of the 
possible action will resurface at an appropriate time. I’ll 
elaborate on these in more detail in the next chapter, on 
organizing. For now, just put a Post-it on such items, and 
label them “maybe” or “remind on October 17,” and set 
them aside in a Pending category you will be accumulating 
for later sorting.~ 


Reference 


Many of the things you will uncover in “in” will need no 
action but may have value as potentially useful information 
about projects and topics. Ideally, you have already set up a 
workable filing system (as described in chapter 4) for your 
reference and support information. As you come across 
material in your in-tray and that you e-mail (and 


attachments and Web links therein) that you’d like to keep 
for archival or support purposes, file it. 

You'll probably discover that there are lots of 
miscellaneous kinds of things that you want to keep but 
have piled up in stacks or stuffed into drawers because your 
reference system was too formal or just plain nonexistent. 
Let me remind you here that a less-than- sixty-second, fun- 
to-use general-reference filing system within reach of 
where you sit is a mission-critical component of full 
implementation of this methodology. In the fast lane of real 
life, if it’s not easy, quick, and fun to file something away, 
you'll stack or simply accumulate it in “in” instead of 
organizing. And then it will become much more difficult to 
keep things processed. 

Whenever you come across something you want to keep, 
make a label for it, put it in a file folder, and tuck that into 
your filing drawer. Or put a Post-it on it instructing your 
assistant to do the same. Or appropriately tag or categorize 
it digitally. In my early days of coaching I used to give my 
clients permission to keep a To File pile. No longer. I 
discovered that if you can’t get it into your system 
immediately, you’re probably not ever going to. If you won’t 
do it now, you likely won’t do it later, either. 

For digital inputs that you want to keep for reference, a 
plethora of options present themselves. If it’s simply an e- 
mail that you want to keep so you can retrieve it later, I 
suggest using the storage folders that are usually available 
in e-mail applications—often in the navigator column on the 
side of the user window. Many people leave these 
nonactionable e-mails in their “in” section as a sort of 
amorphous filing cabinet, which seriously clogs the system. 
You should feel free to instantly create a new reference file 
for a new topic, theme, person, or project, and drag or 
insert the e-mail into it right away. 

For documents, attachments, text, and graphics in e-mail 
that you might want to keep, you will have to develop your 


own filing procedures. These days there are very effective 
document storage applications in the cloud, as well as note- 
making and organizing programs accessible from multiple 
devices. The power, variety, and rapid evolvement of this 
enabling technology belie a recommendation for any one 
universal best practice. It behooves each of us to 
experiment, customize, and modify our digital libraries for 
what works best. The key to keeping it effective will be 
regular revisiting of our data and how we’re organizing it; 
and keeping it current and usable. 

Again, the key driver should be: Do I still have attention 
on my reference content or system? If so, create a project 
and next action to unpack that, to get this significant area 
for you on cruise control. 


And If There Is an Action. . . What Is It? 


Doing a straightforward, clear-cut task that has a beginning and an 
end balances out the complexity-without-end that often vexes the rest 
of my life. Sacred simplicity. 


—Robert Fulghum 


This is perhaps the most fundamental practice of this 
methodology. If there’s something that needs to be done 
about the item in “in,” then you need to decide what, 
exactly, that next action is. “Next action,” again, means the 
next physical, visible activity that would be required to 
move the situation toward closure. 

This is both easier and more difficult than it sounds. 

The next action should be easy to figure out, but there 
are often some quick analyses and several planning steps 
that haven’t occurred yet in your mind, and these have to 


happen before you can determine precisely what has to 
happen to complete the item, even if it’s a fairly simple one. 

Let’s look at a sample list of the things that a person 
might typically have his or her attention on. 


Clean the garage 

Do my taxes 
Conference I’m going to 
Bobby’s birthday 

Press release 
Performance reviews 
Management changes 


Although each of these items may seem relatively clear 
as a task or project, determining the next action on each 
one will take some thought. 

e Clean the garage 

... Well, I just have to get in there and start. No, wait a 
minute, there’s a big refrigerator in there that I need to get 
rid of first. I should find out if John Patrick wants it for his 
camp. I should... 

e Call John re: refrigerator in garage. 

What about... 

e Do my taxes 

... but I actually can’t start on them until I have my last 
investment income documents back. Can’t do anything until 


then. Sol’m... 


e Waiting for documents from Acme Trust 


And forthe... 
e Conference I’m going to 


...1 need to find out whether Sandra is going to prepare 
a press kit for us. I guess I need to... 


e E-mail Sandra re: press kits for the conference. 


... and so forth. The action steps—“Call John,” “Waiting 
for documents,” “E-mail Sandra”—are what need to be 
decided about everything that is actionable in your in-tray. 


The Action Step Needs to Be the Absolute Next 
Physical Thing to Do 


Until you Know what the next physical action is, there’s still more 
thinking required before anything can happen—before you’re 
appropriately engaged. 


Remember that these are physical, visible activities. Many 
people think they’ve determined the next action when they 
get it down to “set meeting.” But that’s not the next action, 
because it’s not descriptive of physical behavior. How do 
you set a meeting? Well, it could be with a phone call or an 
e-mail, but to whom? Decide. If you don’t decide now, you'll 
still have to decide at some other point, and what this 
process is designed to do is actually get you to finish the 
thinking exercise about this item. If you haven’t identified 
the next physical action required to kick-start it, there will 
be a psychological gap every time you think about it even 
vaguely. You’ll tend to resist noticing it, which leads to 
procrastination. 


When you get to a phone or to your computer, you want 
to have all your thinking completed so you can use the tools 
you have and the location you’re in to more easily get things 
done, having already defined what there is to do. 


Determine what physical activity needs to happen to get you to 
decide. 


What if you say to yourself, “Well, the next thing I need to 
do is decide what to do about this”? That’s a tricky one. 
Deciding isn’t really an action, because actions take time, 
and deciding doesn’t. There’s always some physical activity 
that can be done to facilitate your decision making. Ninety- 
nine percent of the time you just need more information 
before you can make a decision. That additional information 
can come from external sources (“Call Susan to get her 
input on the proposal”) or from internal thinking (“Draft 
ideas about new reorganization”). Either way, there’s still a 
next action to be determined in order to move the project 
forward. 


Once You Decide What the Action Step Is 


You have three options once you decide what the next 
action really is: 


e Do it (if the action takes less than two minutes). 

e Delegate it (if you’re not the most appropriate person to 
do the action). 

e Defer it into your organization system as an option for 
work to do later. 


Do It 


If the next action can be done in two minutes or less, do it 
when you first pick the item up. If the e-mail requires just a 
thirty-second reading and then a quick yes/no/other 
response back to the sender, do it now. If you can browse 
the catalog in just a minute or two to see if there might be 
anything of interest in it, browse away, and then toss it, 
route it, or reference it as required. If the next action on 
something is to leave a quick message on someone’s voice 
mail, make the call now. 

Even if the item is not a high-priority one, do it now if 
you’re ever going to do it at all. The rationale for the two- 
minute rule is that it’s more or less the point where it starts 
taking longer to store and track an item than to deal with it 
the first time it’s in your hands—in other words, it’s the 
efficiency cutoff. If the thing’s not important enough to be 
done, throw it away. If it is, and if you’re going to do it 
sometime, the efficiency factor should come into play. 

Many people find that getting into the habit of following 
the two-minute rule creates a dramatic improvement in 
their productivity. One vice president of a large software 
company told me that it gave him an additional hour a day 
of quality discretionary time! He was one of those three- 
hundred-e-mail-a-day high-tech executives, highly focused 
for most of the workday on three key initiatives. Many of 
those e-mails were from people who reported to him—and 
they needed his eyes on something, his comments and OKs, 
in order to move forward. But because they were not ona 
topic in his rifle sights, he would just stage the e-mails in 
“in,” to get to “later.” After several thousand of them piled 
up, he would have to go in to work and spend whole 
weekends trying to catch up. That would have been OK if he 
were twenty-six, when everything’s an adrenaline rush 
anyway, but he was in his thirties and had young kids. 
Working all weekend was no longer acceptable behavior. 
When I coached him he went through all eight-hundred- 
plus e-mails he currently had in “in.” It turned out that a lot 


could be dumped, quite a few needed to be filed as 
reference, and many others required less-than-two-minute 
replies that he whipped through. I checked with him a year 
later, and he was still current! He never let his e-mails 
mount up beyond a screenful anymore. He said it had 
changed the nature of his division because of the dramatic 
decrease in his own response time. His staff thought he was 
now made of Teflon! 


The two-minute rule is magic. 


That’s a rather dramatic testimonial, but it’s an 
indication of just how critical some of these simple 
processing behaviors can be, especially as the volume and 
speed of the input increase for you personally. 

Two minutes is in fact just a guideline. If you have a long 
open window of time in which to process your in-tray, you 
can extend the cutoff for each item to five or ten minutes. If 
you’ve got to get to the bottom of all your input rapidly, in 
order to figure out how best to use your afternoon, then you 
may want to shorten the time to one minute, or even thirty 
seconds, so you can get through everything a little faster. 


You'll be surprised how many two-minute actions you can perform 
even on your most critical projects. 


It’s not a bad idea to time yourself for a few of these 
while you’re becoming familiar with the process. Most 
people I work with have difficulty estimating how long two 
minutes actually is, and they greatly underestimate how 
long certain actions are likely to take. For instance, if your 
action is to leave someone a message, and you get the real 


person instead of his or her voice-mail, the call will usually 
take quite a bit longer than two minutes. 


The world can only be grasped by action, not by contemplation. The 
hand is more important than the eye. ... The hand is the cutting edge 
of the mind. 


—jJ. Bronowski 


There’s nothing you really need to track about your two- 
minute actions—you just do them. If, however, you take an 
action and don’t finish the project with that one action, 
you'll need to clarify what’s next on it, and manage that 
according to the same criteria. For instance, if you act to 
replace a cartridge in your printer and discover that you’re 
now out of extra cartridges, you’ll want to decide on the 
next action about getting them (“Order printer cartridge 
refills online”) and do, delegate, or defer it appropriately. 

Adhere to the two-minute rule and see how much you get 
done in the process of clearing out your “in” stacks. Many 
people are amazed by how many two-minute actions are 
possible, often on some of their most critical current 
projects. They are also delighted with applying this 
approach to small incompletions that have been lying 
around and nagging at them much too long. 

The two-minute rule has become a salvation for many in 
getting control of their huge e-mail volume. In an active e- 
mail environment, it is likely that at least 30 percent of your 
actionable e-mails will require less than two minutes to 
respond and dispatch (assuming you have decent keyboard 
skills). If you’re engaging with your e-mail, holding to this 
suggestion quite significantly improves responsiveness and 
productivity in your ecosystem. When I spend time with 
someone cleaning up his or her e-mail inventory, invariably 


there are dozens of quick actions generated that “move the 
needle” on multiple fronts, unsticking significant backlog. 

That said, you shouldn’t become a slave to spending your 
day doing two-minute actions. This rule should be applied 
primarily when you are engaging with new input; for 
example, processing your in-tray, interacting with someone 
in your office or home, or simply dealing with some random 
intersection in the hallway. But if you don’t do it when it 
shows up, and you do still need to do it, you will have to 
take the time and energy to capture, clarify, and track it, to 
prevent its encroachment into your head. 


Delegate It 


If the next action is going to take longer than two minutes, 
ask yourself, “Am I the best person to be doing it?” If not, 
hand it off to the appropriate party, in a systematic format. 

Delegation is not always downstream. You may decide, 
“This has got to get over to Customer Service,” or “My boss 
needs to put her eyes on this next,” or “I need my partner’s 
point of view on this.” 

A systematic format could be any of the following: 


e Send the appropriate party an e-mail. 

e Write a note or an over-note on paper and route the 
item out to that person. 

e Send him or her a text or leave a voice mail. 

e Add it as an agenda item on a list for your next real- 
time conversation with that person. 

e Talk to him or her directly, either face-to-face or by 
phone, text, or instant message. 


Although any of these options can work, I would (with 
some exceptions) recommend them in the above order, top 
to bottom. E-mail is usually the fastest mode in the system; 


it provides an electronic record; and the receiver gets to 
deal with it at his or her convenience. Written notes are 
next because they, too, can get into the system immediately, 
and the recipient then has a physical particle to use as an 
organizational reminder. If you’re passing on paper-based 
material as part of the handoff, a written communication is 
obviously the way to go; as with e-mail, the person you hand 
it off to can then deal with it on his or her own schedule. 
Voice mail and texting can be efficient, and many 
professionals live by it; the downside is that tracking 
becomes an additional requirement for both you and the 
recipient, what you say is not always what gets heard, and 
texts are infamously cryptic. Next would be saving the 
communication on an agenda list or in a folder for your next 
regular meeting with the person. At times this is necessary 
because of the sensitive or detailed nature of the topic, but 
it then must wait to get moving until that meeting occurs. 
The least preferable option would be to interrupt what both 
you and the person are doing in the moment to talk about 
the item. This is immediate, but it hampers workflow for 
both of you and has the same downside as voice mail: no 
written record. 


Tracking the Handoff If you do delegate an action to 
someone else, and if you care at all whether something 
happens as a result, you'll need to track it. As I walk you 
through in the next chapter, about organizing, you'll see 
that a significant category to manage is Waiting For. 

As you develop your own customized system, what you 
eventually hand off and then track could look like a list ina 
planner, a file folder holding separate papers for each item, 
and/or a list categorized as Waiting For in your software. 
For now, if you don’t have a trusted system set up already, 
just put a note on a piece of paper—“W/F: reply from 
Bob”—and put that into a Pending stack of notes ina 
separate pile or tray that may result from your processing. 


What If the Ball Is Already in Someone Else’s Court? In the 
example cited previously about waiting for some documents 
to arrive so you can do your taxes, the next action is 
currently on someone else’s plate. In such situations you 
will also want to track the action as a delegated item, or as 
a Waiting For. On the paper that says “Do my taxes,” write 
something like “Waiting for tax documents from Acme 
Trust” and put that into your Pending stack. 

It’s important that you record the date on everything 
that you hand off to others. This, of all the categories in 
your personal system, is the most crucial one to keep tabs 
on. The few times you will actually want to refer to that 
information (“But I called and ordered that on March 12”) 
will make it worth establishing this as a lifelong habit. 


Defer It 


It’s likely that most of the next actions you determine for 
things in “in” will be yours to do and will take longer than 
two minutes to complete. A call you need to make toa 
customer; an e-mail to your team that you need to spend a 
little time thinking about and drafting; a gift you need to 
buy for your brother at the sporting goods store; a software 
application you need to download from the Web and try out; 
a conversation you must have with your life partner about 
the school you’re thinking of sending your daughter to—all 
of these fit that description. 

These actions will have to be written down somewhere 
and then organized in the appropriate categories so you 
can access them when you need to. For the moment, go 
ahead and put Post-its on the pieces of paper in “in,” with 
the action written on them, and add these to the Pending 
stack of papers that have been processed. 


The Pending Things That Are Left 


If you follow the instructions in this chapter, you’ll dump a 
mess of things, file a bunch, do a lot of two-minute actions, 
and hand off a number of items to other people. You’ll also 
wind up with a stack of items that have actions associated 
with them that you still need to do—soon, someday, or on a 
specific date—and reminders of things you’re waiting on 
from other people. This Pending group is made up of the 
actions you've delegated or deferred. It is what still needs 
to be organized in some fashion in your personal system, a 
topic I’ll cover in step-by-step detail in the next chapter. 


Identifying the Projects You Have 


This last step in getting to the bottom of “in” requires a shift 
in perspective from the single-action details to the larger 
picture—your projects. 

Again, I define a project as any outcome you’re 
committed to achieving that will take more than one action 
step to complete. If you look through an inventory of actions 
that you have already been generating—“Call Frank about 
the car alarm”; “E-mail Bernadette re: conference 
materials”—you’ll no doubt recognize a number of things 
that are larger than the single action you’ve defined. 
There’s still going to be something to do about the car 
alarm after the call to Frank, and there will still be 
something to handle about the conference after the e-mail 
to Bernadette. 

I hope you’re able to see the very practical reason for 
defining projects as broadly as I do: if the action step you’ve 
identified will not complete the commitment, then you'll 
need some stake in the ground to keep reminding you of 
actions you have pending until you have closure. You need 
to make a list of projects. A “Projects” list may include 


anything from “Give holiday party” to “Divest the software 
product line” to “Finalize compensation package.” The 
purpose of this list is not to reflect your priorities but just to 
ensure that you’ve got placeholders for all those open loops. 


Right now you probably have between thirty and a hundred projects. 


Whether you draw up your Projects list while you’re 
initially processing your in-tray or after you’ve set up your 
action lists doesn’t really matter. It just needs to be done at 
some point, and it must be maintained, as it’s the key driver 
for reviewing where you are and where you want to be, and 
to maintain a sense of week-to-week control of your life. 

For now, let’s make sure your organizing setup is “all 
systems go.” 


Organizing: Setting Up the Right 
Buckets 


Airtight organization is required for your focus to remain on the 
broader horizon and eliminate the constant pressure to remember or 
be reminded. 


HAVING AToTAL and Seamless system of organization in place 
gives you tremendous power because it allows your mind to 
let go of lower-level thinking and graduate to intuitive 
focusing, undistracted by matters that haven’t been dealt 
with appropriately. But your physical organization system 
must be better than your mental one in order for that to 
happen. 

Being organized means nothing more or less than where 
something is matches what it means to you. If you decide 
you want to keep something as reference and you put it 
where your reference material needs to be, that’s 
organized. If you think you need a reminder about a call 
you need to make, as long as you put that reminder where 
you want reminders of phone calls to make, you’re 
organized. As simple as that sounds, it begs a very big 
question: What does something mean to you? It turns out 
that much of what people are trying to organize has not 
been clarified, as per the previous chapter. And even once it 
has, there are more refined distinctions that are possible, 


which will add greater creativity and control for you. I will 
expand on some of those in this chapter, as I’ll lead you 
through the organizing steps and tools that will be required 
as you process your in-tray. As you initially process “in,” 
you'll create lists and groupings of things you want to 
organize and you'll invariably think of additional items to 
include. In other words, your organization system is not 
something that you’ll necessarily create all at once, ina 
vacuum. It will evolve as you process your stuff and test out 
whether you have put everything in the best place for you. 
It should and will evolve, as you do. The core distinctions of 
what things mean to you will be true forever, but the best 
structure for you to manage them a year from now may look 
different than what you come up with dealing with your 
world today. 


I must Create a System or be enslav’d by another Man’s. 


—William Blake 


The outer ring of the Workflow Diagram (opposite) shows 
the main groupings into which things will go as you decide 
what they are and what needs to be done about them. 


The Basic Categories 


There are seven primary types of things that you'll want to 
keep track of and manage from an organizational and 
operational perspective: 


e A Projects list 
e Project support material 
e Calendar actions and information 


Next Actions lists 

A Waiting For list 
Reference material 

A Someday/Maybe list 


The Importance of Hard Edges 


It’s critical that all of these categories be kept pristinely 
distinct from one another. They each represent a discrete 
type of agreement we make with ourselves, to be reminded 
of at a specific time and in a specific way, and if they lose 
their edges and begin to blend, much of the value of 
organizing will be lost. 


“stuff ” 
Vv 





In-basket 


: 
What is it? 


Someday/ 
ls it actionable? maybe 


{tickler file; hold 
Vv 
| 


for review} 
Multistep Reference 
A jects projects {retrievable 
{planning} whe when required} 





















































T What's the 
a next action? 
Project plans | 
{review for actions} Will it take less than 2 minutes? 
yes no 








Do it Delegate it Defer it 


Waiting Calendar Next actions 
{for someone else to do} {to do at a specific time} J { {to do as soon as | can} 


WORKFLOW DIAGRAM— ORGANIZING 


That’s why capturing and clarifying what your 
relationship to them is, specifically, is primary to getting 
organized. Most people try to create more control in their 
world by just “getting organized,” and they wind up 
rearranging incomplete inventories of still unclear things. 
Once you’ve gone through my previously suggested 
processes, however, you will have very clear contents of 
what you need to track, and a very practical way to sort 
them and create their descriptors. 


The categories must be kept visually, physically, and psychologically 
separate, to promote clarity. 


If you neglect this categorization, and allow things of 
different meanings into the same visual or mental grouping, 
you will tend to go psychologically numb to the contents. If 
you put reference materials in the same pile as things you 
still want to read, for example, you'll go unconscious to the 
stack. If you put items on your Next Actions lists that really 
need to go on the calendar, because they have to occur on 
specific days, then you won’t trust your calendar and you'll 
continually have to reassess your action lists. If you have 
projects that you’re not going to be doing anything about 
for some time, they must go on your Someday/Maybe list so 
you can relate to the Projects list with the rigorous action- 
generating focus it needs. And if something you’re Waiting 
For is included on one of your action lists, nonproductive 
rethinking will continually bog you down. 


All You Really Need Are Lists and Folders 


Once you know what you need to keep track of (covered in 
the previous chapter, “Clarifying”), all you really need are 


lists and folders—totally sufficient tools for reminders, 
reference, and support materials. Your lists (which, as I’ve 
indicated, could also be items in folders) will keep track of 
projects and someday/maybes, as well as the actions you'll 
need to take on your active open loops. Folders (digital or 
paper based) will be required to hold your reference 
material and the support information for active projects. 


I would not give a fig for the simplicity on this side of complexity, but I 
would give my life for the simplicity on the other side of complexity. 


—Oliver Wendell Holmes 


Lots of people have been making lists for years but have 
never found the procedure to be particularly effective. 
There’s rampant skepticism about systems as simple as the 
one I’m recommending. But most list makers haven’t put 
the appropriate things on their lists, or have left them 
incomplete, which has kept the lists themselves from being 
very functional for keeping your head clear. Once you know 
what goes on the lists, however, things get much easier; 
then you just need a way to manage them. 

As I’ve said, you shouldn’t bother to create some external 
structuring of the priorities on your lists that you’ll then 
have to rearrange or rewrite as things change. Attempting 
to impose such scaffolding has been a big source of 
frustration in many people’s organizing. You'll be 
prioritizing more intuitively as you see the whole list against 
quite a number of shifting variables. The list is just a way 
for you to keep track of the total inventory of active things 
to which you have made a commitment, and to have that 
inventory available for review. 

When I refer to a “list,” keep in mind that I mean nothing 
more than a grouping of items with some similar 
characteristic. A list could look like one of at least three 


things: (1) a file folder or container with separate paper 
notes for the items within the category; (2) an actual list on 
a titled piece of paper (often within a loose-leaf organizer or 
planner); or (3) an inventory of items on a list in a software 
program or in a digital mobile device. 


Organizing Action Reminders 


If you’ve emptied your in-tray, you'll undoubtedly have 
created a stack of Pending reminders for yourself, 
representing longer-than-two-minute actions that cannot be 
delegated to someone else. You’ll probably have anywhere 
from twenty to sixty or seventy or more such items. You'll 
also have accumulated reminders of things that you’ve 
handed off to other people, and perhaps some things that 
need to be placed on your calendar or in a Someday/Maybe 
holder. 

You'll want to sort all of this into groupings that make 
sense to you so you can review them as options for work to 
do when you have time. You’ll also want to divide them in 
the most appropriate way physically to organize those 
groups, whether as items in folders or on lists, either paper 
based or digital. 


The Actions That Go on Your Calendar 


For the purposes of organization, as I’ve said, there are two 
basic kinds of actions: those that must be done on a certain 
day and/or at a particular time, and those that just need to 
be done as soon as you can get to them, around your other 
calendar items (some perhaps with a final due date). 
Calendared action items can be either time specific (e.g., 


“10:00-11:00 meet with Jim”) or day specific (“Call Rachel 
Tuesday to see if she got the proposal”). 


The calendar should show only the “hard landscape” around which 
you do the rest of your actions. 


As you were processing your in-tray, you probably came 
across things that you put right into your calendar as they 
showed up. You may have realized that the next action on 
getting a medical checkup, for example, was to call and 
make the appointment, and so (since the action required 
two minutes or less) you actually did it when it occurred to 
you. Writing the appointment on your calendar as you made 
it would then have been common sense. 

What many want to do, however, based on perhaps old 
habits of writing daily to-do lists, is put actions on the 
calendar that they think they’d really like to get done next 
Monday, say, but that actually might not, and that might 
then have to be moved to following days. Resist this 
impulse. You need to trust your calendar as sacred territory, 
reflecting the exact hard edges of your day’s commitments, 
which should be noticeable at a glance while you’re on the 
run. That’ll be much easier if the only things in there are 
those that you absolutely have to get done, or know about, 
on that day. When the calendar is relegated to its proper 
role in organizing, the majority of the actions that you need 
to do are left in the category of “as soon as possible, against 
all the other things I have to do.” 


Organizing As-Soon-As-Possible Actions by Context 


Over many years I have discovered that the best way to be 
reminded of an “as soon as I can” action is by the particular 


context required for that action—that is, either the tool or 
the location or the situation needed to complete it. For 
instance, if the action requires a computer, it should go on 
an At Computer list. If your action demands that you be out 
and moving around in the world (such as stopping by the 
bank or going to the hardware store), the Errands list 
would be the appropriate place to track it. If the next step is 
to talk about something face-to-face with your partner, 
Emily, putting it into an “Emily” folder or list makes the 
most sense. 

How discrete these categories will need to be will 
depend on (1) how many actions you actually have to track; 
and (2) how often you change the contexts within which to 
do them. 

If you are that rare person who has only twenty-five next 
actions, a single Next Actions list might suffice. It could 
include items as diverse as “Buy nails,” “Talk to boss about 
staff changes,” and “Draft ideas about committee meeting.” 
If, however, you have fifty or a hundred next actions 
pending, keeping all of those on one big list would make it 
too difficult to see what you need to see; each time you got 
any window of time to do something, you’d have to do 
unproductive re-sorting. If you happened to be on a short 
break at a conference, during which you might be able to 
make some calls, you’d have to identify the calls among a 
big batch of unrelated items. When you went out to do odds 
and ends, you’d probably want to pick out your errands and 
make another list. 

Another productivity factor that this kind of organization 
supports is leveraging your energy when you’re in a certain 
mode. When you’re in “phone mode,” it helps to make a lot 
of phone calls—just crank down your Calls list. When your 
computer is up and running and you’re cruising along 
digitally, it’s useful to get as much done online as you can 
without having to shift into another kind of activity. It takes 
more energy than most people realize to unhook out of one 


set of behaviors and get into another kind of rhythm and 
tool set. And obviously, when a key person is sitting in front 
of you in your office, you’d be wise to have all the things you 
need to talk about with him or her immediately at hand. 


The Most Common Categories of Action Reminders 


You'll probably find that at least a few of the following 
common list headings for next actions will make sense for 
you: 


Calls 

At Computer 

Errands 

At Office (miscellaneous) 

At Home 

Anywhere 

Agendas (for people and meetings) 
Read/Review 


Calls This is the list of all the phone calls you need to make; 
you can work off it as long as you have a phone available. 
The more mobile you are, the more useful you'll find it to 
have one single list of all your calls: those strange little 
windows of time that you wind up with when you’re off-site, 
out and about, traveling, on a break, or waiting for a plane 
or for your kid to come out from school offer a perfect 
opportunity to make use of that list. Having a discrete Calls 
category makes it much easier to focus and intuitively pick 
the best one to make in the moment. 

I suggest that you take the time to record the phone 
number alongside each item. There are many situations in 
which you would probably make the call if the number was 
already there in front of you but not if you had to look it up, 


and if you’re using a mobile device then only a tap is 
required to engage. 


At Computer If you work with a computer—particularly if 
you move around with a laptop/tablet or have a computer at 
work and another at home—it can be helpful to group all 
those actions that you need to do when it’s on and running. 
This will allow you to see all your options for computer work 
to do, reminding you of the e-mails you need to send, the 
documents you need to draft or edit, and so on. 


Think carefully about where and when and under what circumstances 
you can do which actions, and organize your lists accordingly. 


Because I fly a lot, I maintain an Online action list, 
separate from my At Computer one. When I’m on a plane 
without a Wi-Fi service I can’t connect to the Web or my 
servers, aS many actions require. So instead of having to 
rethink what I can and can’t do whenever I look at my At 
Computer list, I can trust that none of my At Computer 
actions require that I be connected, which frees my mind to 
make choices based on other criteria. 

If you only do at-computer work at your office, or at your 
home, you could incorporate those actions on those 
location-specific lists, though you might still find it 
functional to see reminders of computer work grouped 
together when you’re sitting in that context. On the other 
hand, if your work and activities are primarily mobile- 
centric, and you could be taking actions equally on a laptop, 
tablet, or smartphone, then parking those reminders on a 
single Digital context list or folding them into the Anywhere 
category might work best. 


Frrands It makes a lot of sense to group together in one 
place reminders of all the things you need to do when 
you’re out and about. When you know you need to go 
somewhere, it’s great to be able to look at that list to allow 
for the option of handling numerous things along the way, in 
one trip. Actions like “Get stock certificates from bank 
deposit box,” “Pick up suit at the tailor,” and “Buy flowers 
for Robyn at the florist” would all go here. 


We must strive to reach that simplicity that lies beyond sophistication. 


—John Gardner 


This list could, of course, be nothing more elaborate than 
a Post-it that you keep in your planner or on your 
refrigerator door, or in an Errands category in some digital 
task manager. 

It’s often helpful to track sublists within individual 
Errands items. For instance, as soon as you realize you 
need something from the hardware store, you might want 
to make “hardware store” the list item and then append a 
sublist of all the things you want to pick up there, as you 
think of them. On the low-tech end, you could create a 
“hardware store” Post-it; on the high-tech side, if you were 
using a digital list, you could attach a “note” to “hardware 
store” on your list and input the details there.- 


Simplifying your focus on actions will ensure that more of them get 
done. 


At Office If you work in an office, there will be certain 
things that you can do only there, and a list of those things 
will be useful to have in front of you then—though obviously, 
if you have a phone and a computer in your office, and you 


have “Calls” and “At Computer” as separate lists, they'll be 
in play as well. I’d use an “Office Actions” or “At Office” list 
for anything that required me being physically present 
there to take the action, such as purging an office filing 
cabinet or printing and reviewing a large document with a 
staff person. 

A major trend now is for organizations to become more 
open, flexible, and virtual. “Hotel-ing” (i.e. not having a 
permanent office, but rather “plugging in” in any available 
location) is on the rise. Consequently, At Office could mean 
simply an action that requires being at any of several 
company locations. Or, for some people, it’s useful to have 
both an At Office “A” and an At Office “B” list, for those 
things that are still discretely tied to one physical location 
or another. 


At Home Many actions can be done only at home, and it 
makes sense to keep a list specific to that context. I’m sure 
you’ve got numerous personal and around-the-house 
projects, and often the next thing to do on them is just to do 
them. “Hang new watercolor print,” “Organize travel 
accessories,” and “Switch closets to winter clothes” would 
be typical items for this grouping. 

If you have an office at home, as I do, anything that can 
be done only there goes on the At Home list. (If you work 
only at home and don’t go to another office, you won’t need 
an At Office list at all—the At Home list could suffice.) 

Similar to people who work at various locations, many 
people have multiple personal work environments, such as 
vacation homes, boats, and even the local gourmet coffee 
shop or café. “At Starbucks” can be a fine categorization for 
an action list! 


Agendas* Invariably you’ll find that many of your next 
actions need to either occur in a real-time interaction with 
someone or be brought up in a committee, team, or staff 


meeting. You have to talk to your partner about an idea for 
next year; you want to check with your life partner about 
his schedule for the spring; you need to delegate a task to 
your assistant that’s too complicated to explain in an e-mail. 
And you must make an announcement at the Monday staff 
meeting about the change in expense-report policies. 


Standing meetings and people you deal with on an ongoing basis 
often need their own Agenda list. 


These next actions should be put on separate Agenda 
lists for each of those people and for that meeting 
(assuming you attend it regularly). Professionals who keep 
a file folder to hold all the things they need to go over with 
their boss already use a version of this method. If you’re 
conscientious about determining all your next actions, 
though, you may find that you’ll need somewhere between 
three and fifteen of these kinds of lists. 1 recommend that 
separate lists be kept for bosses, partners, assistants, and 
children. You should also keep the same kind of list for your 
attorney, financial adviser, accountant, and/or computer 
consultant, as well as for anyone else with whom you might 
have more than one thing to go over the next time you talk 
on the phone or in person. 


The broader your responsibilities, and the more senior your 
organizational roles, the more you will get things done through your 
communications and transactions with other people. 


If you participate in standing meetings—staff meetings, 
project meetings, board meetings, committee meetings, 
parent/teacher meetings, whatever—they, too, deserve 
their own lists, in which you collect things that will need to 
be addressed on those occasions. 


Often you’ll want to keep a running list of things to go 
over with someone you'll be interacting with only fora 
limited period of time. For instance, if you have a contractor 
doing a significant piece of work on your house or property, 
you can create a list for him for the duration of the project. 
As you’re walking around the site after he’s left for the day, 
you may notice several things you need to talk with him 
about, and you'll want that list to be easy to capture and to 
access as needed. 

Given the usefulness of this type of list, your system 
should allow you to add Agendas ad hoc, as needed quickly 
and simply. For example, inserting a page or a list fora 
person or a meeting within an Agenda section of a loose- 
leaf notebook planner takes only seconds, as does adding a 
dedicated “note” within an Agenda category in your digital 
tools. 


Read/Review You will no doubt have discovered in your in- 
tray a number of things for which your next action is to 
read. I hope you have held to the two-minute rule and 
dispatched many of those quick-skim items already— 
tossing, filing, or routing them forward as appropriate. 


Those who make the worst use of their time are the first to complain of 
its shortness. 


—Jean de La Bruyére 


To-read printed items that you know will demand more 
than two minutes of your time are usually best managed in 
a separate physical stack tray labeled “Read/Review.” This 
is still a “list” by my definition, but one that’s more 
efficiently dealt with by grouping the documents and 
magazines themselves in a tray and/or portable folder. 


For many people, the Read/Review stack can get quite 
large. That’s why it’s critical that the pile be reserved only 
for those longer-than-two-minute things that you actually 
want to read when you have time. That can be daunting 
enough in itself, but things get seriously out of control and 
psychologically numbing when the edges of this category 
are not clearly defined. A pristine delineation will at least 
make you conscious of the inventory, and if you’re like most 
people, having some type of selfregulating mechanism will 
help you become more aware of what you want to keep and 
what you should just get rid of. 

Some professionals (e.g., attorneys) still work with 
significant printed materials, and although most of their 
documents may be generated and maintained in digital 
form, working with the document in physical form still 
remains the optimal way to deal with it. In those cases it 
often makes sense, in addition to a Read/Review box or tray, 
to have a Review/Respond category for the more rigorous 
reading that requires a different kind of focus. 

It’s practical to have organized reading material at hand 
when you're on your way to a meeting that may be starting 
late, a seminar that may have a window of time when 
nothing is going on, a dentist appointment that may keep 
you waiting, or, of course, if you’re going to have some time 
on a train or plane. Those are all great opportunities to 
browse and work through that kind of reading. People who 
don’t have their Read/Review material organized can waste 
a lot of time, since life is full of weird little windows when it 
could be used. 

Given the amount of digital input we’re getting that 
includes data to read and view, much of which is not really 
critical to our work or life but is potentially interesting or 
fun, it can be useful to create an organizational bucket 
within that world for such things. A Review/Watch file in 
your e-mail folder system or a Surf Web action list could be 


a good place to hold e-mails with links to recommended 
videos, blogs, or online articles. 


Organizing “Waiting For” 


Manage the commitments of others before their avoidance creates a 
crisis. 


Like reminders of the actions you need to do, reminders of 
all the things that you’re waiting to get back from or get 
done by others have to be sorted and grouped. You won’t 
necessarily be tracking discrete action steps here, but more 
often final deliverables or projects that others are 
responsible for, such as the tickets you’ve ordered from the 
theater, the scanner that’s coming for the office, the OK on 
the proposal from your client, and so on. When the next 
action on something is up to someone else, you don’t need 
an action reminder, just a trigger about what you’re waiting 
for and from whom. Your role is to review that list as often 
as you need to and assess whether you ought to be taking 
an action, such as checking the status or lighting a fire in 
some way under the project. 

For many people, especially those in managerial or 
supervisory positions, getting this inventory of unfulfilled 
commitments that we care about from others captured, 
current, complete, and reviewed creates tremendous relief 
and improved focus going forward. 

You'll probably find that it works best to keep this 
Waiting For list close at hand, in the same system as your 
Next Actions reminder lists. The responsibility for the next 
step may bounce back and forth many times before a 
project is finished. For example, you may need to make a 
call to a vendor to request a proposal (which then goes to 


your Waiting For list). When the proposal comes in, you 
have to review it (it lands in your Read/Review tray or on 
your At Computer list). Once you’ve gone over it, you send it 
to your boss for her approval (now it’s back on your Waiting 
For list). And so on.* 

It’s also very useful to have your Waiting For list available 
when you are meeting with or talking to anyone who might 
be responsible for any of those deliverables. It is much 
more elegant to broach a conversation early on, such as 
“Oh yeah, how’s it going with the Gonzalez proposal?” than 
to wait until it’s overdue and the situation is in a stress 
mode. 

It’s important for this category in particular to include 
the date that each item is requested for each entry, as well 
as any agreed-upon due date. Follow-up is much more 
meaningful when you can say, “But I placed the order 
March twentieth” or “You’ve had the proposal now for three 
weeks.” In my experience, just this one tactical detail is 
worth its weight in gold. 

You'll get a great feeling when you know that your 
Waiting For list is the complete inventory of everything you 
care about that other people are supposed to be doing. 


Using the Original Item as Its Own Action Reminder 


Keep actionable e-mails and paper separated from all the rest. 


The most efficient way to track your action reminders is to 
add them to lists or folders as they occur to you. The 
originating trigger won’t be needed after you have 
processed it. You might take notes in the meeting with your 
boss, but you can toss those after you’ve pulled out any 
projects and actions associated with them. While some 


people try to archive texts or voice mails that they still need 
to do something about, that’s not the most effective way to 
manage the reminders embedded in them. 

There are some exceptions to this rule, however. Certain 
kinds of input will most efficiently serve as their own 
reminders of required actions, rather than your having to 
write something about them on a list. This is particularly 
true for some paper-based materials and some e-mail. 


Managing Paper-Based Workflow 


Some things are their own best reminders of work to be 
done. The category of Read/Review articles, publications, 
and documents is a good example. It would obviously be 
overkill to write “Review Vogue magazine” on some action 
list when you could just as easily toss the magazine itself 
into your Read/Review tray to act as the trigger. 

Another example: if you are still doing paper-based bill 
paying, you'll probably find it easier to deal with the bills by 
paying them all at one time, so you keep them in a folder or 
stack tray labeled “Bills to Pay” (or, more generically, 
“Financial to Process”). Similarly, receipts for expense 
reporting should be either dealt with at the time they’re 
generated or kept in their own Receipts to Process 
envelope or folder.- 

The specific nature of your work, your input, and your 
workstation may make it more efficient to organize other 
categories using only the original document itself. A 
customer-service professional, for instance, may deal with 
numerous requests that show up in some standard form, 
and in that case maintaining a tray or file (paper or digital) 
containing only those actionable items is the best way to 
manage them. An attorney or accountant may deal with 
documents they need to spend time reviewing to determine 


actions, which could be stacked in a tray on the desk with 
items of that specific nature. 


The primary reason for organizing is to reduce cognitive load—i.e. to 
eliminate the need to constantly be thinking, “What do I need to do 
about this?” 


Whether it makes more sense to write reminders on a list 
or to use the originating documents in a tray or folder or 
digital directory will depend to a great extent on logistics. 
Could you use those reminders somewhere other than at 
your desk? If so, the portability of the material should be 
considered. If you couldn’t possibly do that work anywhere 
but at your desk, then managing reminders of it solely at 
your workstation is the better choice. 

Whichever option you select, the reminders should be in 
visibly discrete categories based upon the next action 
required. If the next action on a service order is to make a 
call, it should be in a Calls group; if the action step is to 
review information and input it into the computer, it should 
be labeled “At Computer.” Most undermining of the 
effectiveness of many workflow systems I see is the fact that 
all the documents of one type (e.g. service requests) are 
kept in a single tray or file, even though different kinds of 
actions may be required on each one. One request needs a 
phone call, another needs data reviewed, and still another 
is waiting for someone to get back with some information— 
but they’re all sorted together. This arrangement can cause 
a person’s mind to go numb to the stack because of all the 
decisions that are still pending about the next-action level 
of doing. 

My personal system is highly portable, with almost 
everything kept on lists, but I still maintain a Read/Review 
stack tray in my office and the traveling version as a plastic 
folder with the same title. Though I store and read some 


magazines digitally, it’s still both logistically functional and 
aesthetically pleasing to me to have the physical version at 
hand. 


Managing E-mail-Based Workflow 


Like some paper-based materials, e-mails that need action 
are sometimes best as their own reminders—in this case 
within the e-mail system itself. This is especially true if you 
get a lot of e-mail and spend a lot of your work time with 
your e-mail software active at hand. E-mails that you need 
to act on may then be stored within the system instead of 
having their embedded actions written out or distributed on 
another list. 

Many people have found it helpful to set up two or three 
unique folders on their e-mail navigator bars. True, most 
folders in e-mail should be used for reference or archived 
materials, but it’s also possible to set up a workable system 
that will keep your actionable messages discretely 
organized outside the “in” area itself (which is where most 
people tend to keep them).~ 

If you choose this route, I recommend that you create 
one folder for any longer-than-two-minute e-mails that you 
need to act on (again, you should be able to dispatch many 
messages right off the bat by following the two-minute 
rule). The folder name should begin with a prefix letter or 
symbol so that (1) it looks different from your reference 
folders and (2) it sits at the top of your folders in the 
navigator bar. Use something like the @ sign or the hyphen, 
whichever will sort into your system at the top. Your 
resulting @ACTION folder will hold those e-mails that you 
need to do something about. 

Next you can create a folder titled “@WAITING FOR,” 
which will show up in the same place as the @ACTION 
folder. Then, as you receive e-mails that indicate that 


someone is going to do something you care about tracking, 
you can drag them over into the @WAITING FOR file. It can 
also hold reminders for anything that you delegate via e- 
mail: when you forward something, or use e-mail to make a 
request or delegate an action, just save a cc: or bcc: copy 
into your @WAITING FOR file.~ 


It takes much less energy to maintain e-mail backlog at zero than at a 
thousand. 


Some applications allow you to file a copy of an e-mail 
into one of your folders as you send it (with a “Send and 
File” button). Others will simultaneously save only into your 
universal “Sent Mail” folder. In the latter case, what seems 
to work best for many is to copy (“cc” or “bcc”) themselves 
when they delegate via e-mail, and then to put that copy 
into their “@WAITING FOR’ folder. 


Getting E-mail “In” to Empty The method detailed above 
will enable you to actually get everything out of your e-mail 
in-tray, which will be a huge boon to your clarity about, and 
control of, your day-to-day work. You'll reclaim “in” as “in,” 
so anything residing there will be like a new message in 
your voice mail or an unread text on your mobile device— 
clues that you need to process something. Most people use 
their e-mail “in” for staging still-undecided actionable 
things, reference, and even trash, a practice that rapidly 
numbs the mind: they know they’ve got to reassess 
everything every time they glance at the screen. 

Again, getting “in” empty doesn’t mean you’ve handled 
everything. It means that you’ve deleted what you could, 
filed what you wanted to keep but don’t need to act on, 
done the less-than-two-minute responses, and moved into 
your reminder folders all the things you’re waiting for and 


all your actionable e-mails. Now you can open the 
@ACTION file and review the e-mails that you’ve 
determined you need to spend time on. Isn’t that process 
easier to relate to than fumbling through multiple screens, 
fearing all the while that you may miss something that'll 
blow up on you? 


A Caution About Dispersing Reminders of Your 
Actions 


Paper-based data is sometimes easier to trust for utility than digital 
versions. 


There’s an obvious danger in putting reminders of things 
you need to do somewhere out of sight. The function of an 
organization system is primarily to supply the reminders 
you need to see when you need to see them, so you can 
trust your choices about what you’re doing (and what 
you’re not doing). Before you leave your office for the day, 
or before you decide to spend a big part of your day doing 
something previously unplanned, those actionable e-mails 
that you still have pending must be reviewed individually, 
just like your Calls and At Computer lists. In essence, 
@ACTION is an extension of your At Computer list and 
should be handled in exactly the same fashion. Your paper- 
based Pending workflow must likewise be assessed like a 
list if the paper materials are being used as your only 
reminders. 

Distributing action triggers in a folder, on lists, and/or in 
an e-mail system is perfectly OK, as long as you review all 
of the categories to which you’ve entrusted your triggers 
equally, as required. You don’t want things lurking in the 
recesses of your systems and not being used for their 
intended purpose: reminding you. The digital world can be 


dangerous in this regard, because as soon as data is 
offscreen, it can tend to disappear as a viable prompt. This 
has caused many computer-savvy people to revert to a 
paper planner—its physicality and visual obviousness can 
create much more trust that their reminders will actually 
remind them! 

In order to hang out with friends or take a long, aimless 
walk and truly have nothing on your mind, you’ve got to 
know where all your actionable items are located, what they 
are, and that they will wait. And you need to be able to do 
that in a few seconds, not days. 


Organizing Project Reminders 


Creating and maintaining one list of all your projects (that 
is, again, every commitment or desired outcome that may 
require more than one action step to complete) can be a 
profound experience! You probably have more of them than 
you think. If you haven’t done so already, I recommend that 
initially you make a Projects list in a very simple format, 
similar to the ones you’ve used for your lists of actions; it 
can be a category in a digital organizer, a page in a loose- 
leaf planner, or even a single file folder labeled “Projects,” 
with either a master list or separate sheets of paper for 
each one. 


The Projects List(s) 


A complete and current Projects list is the major operational tool for 
moving from tree-hugging to forest management. 


The Projects list is not meant to hold plans or details about 
your projects themselves, nor should you try to keep it 
arranged by priority or size or urgency—it’s just a 
comprehensive index of your open loops. You actually won’t 
be working off of the Projects list during your moment-to- 
moment activities; for the most part, your calendar, action 
lists, and any unexpected tasks that come up will constitute 
your tactical and immediate focus. Remember, you can’t do 
a project; you can only do the action steps it requires. Being 
aware of the horizon represented by your projects, 
however, is critical for extending your comfort with your 
control and focus into longer reaches of time. 

The real value of the Projects list lies in the complete 
review it can provide (at least once a week), ensuring that 
you have action steps defined for all of your projects and 
that nothing is slipping through the cracks. A quick glance 
at this list from time to time will enhance your underlying 
sense of control. You’ll also know that you have an inventory 
available to you (and to others) whenever it seems 
advisable to evaluate workload(s). 


The Value of a Complete Projects List 


The very broad and simple definition of a project that I have 
given (more than one action needed to achieve a desired 
result) provides an important net to capture the more 
subtle things that pull or push on your consciousness. If you 
work in an industry that is formally project focused 
(manufacturing, software, consulting, etc.), it may be 
challenging to realize that “look into getting a dog for our 
kids” and “find a good tailor” are projects! But whether you 
call them “projects” or something else, they still demand a 
certain kind of attention to relieve their pressure on your 
internal space. 


Getting the inventory of all of those things complete, 
current, and clear for yourself, and acquiring the habit of 
maintaining it that way, could be one of the most valuable 
things you do to enable stress-free productivity for yourself 
from now on. Here are some of the reasons why: 


e Critical for control and focus 

e Alleviates subtle tensions 

¢ Core of the Weekly Review 

e Facilitates relationship management 


Critical for Control and Focus It is impossible to be truly 
relaxed and in your productive state when things you’ve 
told yourself you need to handle continue to pull at your 
mind—whether they be little or big. It seems that “I’ve got 
to get my driver’s license renewed” can take up as much 
space in your head as “I need to formulate the agenda for 
next year’s conference” when an external list of such things 
is not complete and reviewed regularly. 


Projects seldom show up in nice, neat packages. Small things often slip 
unexpectedly into bigger things. 


Alleviates Subtle Tensions The smaller or more subtle 
things we tell ourselves we need to deal with create some of 
the more challenging stresses to handle, simply because 
they are not so much “in your face.” Projects often don’t 
show up in nice, neat packages. They start as what seems a 
simple situation, communication, or activity, but they slowly 
morph into something bigger than you expected. You 
thought you handled getting your daughter into preschool, 
but now there’s a problem with the registration forms or a 
change in the logistical details. You thought the invoice you 
sent was complete and accurate, but now the client says he 


didn’t agree to something you billed him for. Getting these 
kinds of situations identified and into your system with 
desired outcomes for appropriate engagement creates a 
wealth of fresh energy with unexpected positive results. 


Core of the Weekly Review As I have indicated in other 
places, the Weekly Review is the critical success factor for 
marrying your larger commitments to your day-to-day 
activities. And a complete Projects list remains the linchpin 
for that orientation. Ensuring weekly that you’re OK about 
what you’re doing (or not doing) with a dog for your kids, 
along with what you’re doing (or not doing) about next 
year’s conference, is an essential practice. But that Projects 
list must already be there, in at least a somewhat recent 
form, before you have the capability to think about things 
from that perspective. 


Facilitates Relationship Management Whether you are in 
conversation with your boss, your staff, your partner, or 
your family, having a sense of control and overview of all of 
your commitments that may have relevance in your 
relationships with them is extremely valuable. Invariably 
there are challenges with allocating limited resources— 
your time, your money, your attention. And when others are 
involved with you in ways that pull on those resources, 
being able to negotiate (and frequently renegotiate) those 
explicit and implicit agreements is the only way to 
effectively relieve those inherent pressures. Once 
executives and spouses and staff people get the picture of 
the commitments of their work and life, it triggers 
extremely important and constructive conversations with 
those involved. But it doesn’t happen without that complete 
list. 


Where to Look for Projects Still to Uncover 


There are three primary areas in which you are likely to 
have “hidden” projects: 


e Current activities 
e Higher-horizon interests and commitments 
e Current problems, issues, and opportunities 


Current Activities Often there are projects that need to be 
captured from a simple inventory of your calendar, your 
action lists, and your workspaces. 

What meetings are on your schedule—past or upcoming 
—because of some outcome you’re committed to achieving 
that the meeting itself does not complete or resolve? You 
may notice that a conference call you’ve been scheduled for 
is about a client request for a new custom program he or 
she might want. Voila! A project—“Look into possible 
custom program for Client XYZ.” You may have an evening 
orientation event calendared for parents at your son’s 
school that reminds you that you have an issue to resolve 
about his schedule of classes. Personal or business trips 
coming up, conferences on your calendar, etc.—all should 
be assessed for projects that deserve acknowledging. 

There are also very likely still unrecognized projects 
connected to the next actions on your lists. Many times 
people we work with have “Call Mario re: the fund-raising 
event” on their Calls list, but have not yet identified 
“Finalize the fund-raiser” as something that should be on 
their Projects list. 

And—though it should be obvious but at times isn’t— 
there are proposals or contracts to review in your briefcase, 
forms to fill out for the bank on your desk at home, ora 
broken watch in your purse that are actually project 
artifacts. Double-check that you have them all associated 
with the further and final outcomes instead of remaining 
workflow orphans. 


Higher-Horizon Interests and Commitments There is a good 
chance that you might still have subtle attention on some of 
your commitments and interests from a longer and higher 
view of your responsibilities, goals, visions, and core values. 

A review of the accountabilities you’re invested in 
professionally—the things you need to be doing well in your 
roles at work—and the areas of your life you need to keep 
up to certain standards will likely trigger some reminders of 
things that may have been taking some of your attention, 
for which defining a project about them will be valuable. 

If you have professional goals, company objectives, and 
strategic plans, have you identified all the projects that they 
should engender for you, so that you can move on them 
appropriately? I have seldom had an executive pull out and 
review any long-range planning document without her 
realizing there is at least one project she needs to clarify for 
herself in regard to it. Are there things coming toward you 
further out in the future of your personal life that have 
started to pull on your attention to do something about 
them—kids or parents growing older, your retirement, life 
partner’s aspirations, fun and creative things you'd love to 
start exploring? This kind of reflection often produces at 
least some “look into” kinds of projects that, once identified, 
will produce a greater sense of being on top of your bigger 
world. 


Current Problems, Issues, and Opportunities A very rich 
place from which to gather items for your inventory is the 
broad area of often-amorphous things that can disturb your 
focus if not recognized and dealt with by shaping them into 
real projects with action steps. These fall into three 
categories: 


e Problems 
e Process improvements 
e Creative and capacity-building opportunities 


When is a problem a project? Always. When you assess 
something as a problem instead of as something to simply 
be accepted as the way things are, you are assuming there 
is a potential resolution. Whether there is or not might still 
need to be determined. But at the very least you have some 
research to do to find out. “Look into improving Frederick’s 
relationship with his school,” “Resolve situation with 
landlord and building maintenance,” and “Get closure on 
compensation dispute with business partner” are the kinds 
of very real projects that you might resist defining as such. 
When you actually do put words to it, put it on your list and 
create a next action for it; you will surprise yourself with a 
new level of elegance in the stress-free productivity game. 

Invariably there are also projects lurking amid your 
administrative, maintenance, and workflow processes—in 
both the professional and personal arenas. What do you 
find yourself complaining about regarding your systems or 
simply how things are getting done (or not)? Is there 
anything frustrating about your procedures for filing, 
storage, communication, hiring, tracking, or record 
keeping? Does anything need improving in terms of your 
personal or business expense reporting, banking or 
investing processes, or how you keep in touch with friends 
and family? These are also the kinds of projects that usually 
become projects slyly—it’s tricky to notice when they cross 
the line between mildly irritating and a real bother (or 
inspiration) that deserves to get done. 

Finally, there might very well be things you’ve been 
telling yourself you'd like to learn or experience to expand 
your own development or creative expression. Would you 
like to learn Italian cooking or how to draw? Have you been 
telling yourself it would be great to take an online course in 
digital photography or social media marketing? It’s very 
possible that many of these kinds of “might like to” projects 
would live just fine on your Someday/Maybe list. But as you 
gain greater familiarity with the effectiveness of GTD, you 


will want to take advantage of the methodology to more 
readily incorporate new, interesting, and useful experiences 
into your life by defining desired outcomes about them on 
the Projects list. 


One List, or Subdivided? 


Most people find that one list is the best way to go because 
it serves as a master inventory rather than as a daily 
prioritizing guideline. The organizing system merely 
provides placeholders for all your open loops and options so 
your mind can more easily make the necessary intuitive, 
moment-to-moment strategic decisions. 

Frankly, it doesn’t matter how many different lists of 
projects you have, so long as you look at the contents of all 
of them as often as you need to. For the most part you'll do 
that in one fell swoop during your Weekly Review. 


Some Common Ways to Subsort Projects 


There are some situations in which it makes good sense 
(and eases some anxieties!) to subsort a Projects list. Let’s 
look at some usual options. 


Personal/Professional Many people feel more comfortable 
seeing their lists divided up between personal and 
professional projects. If you’re among them, be advised that 
your Personal list will need to be reviewed as judiciously as 
your Professional one, and not just saved for weekends. 
Many actions on personal things will need to be handled on 
weekdays, exactly like everything else. And often some of 
the greatest pressures on professionals stem from the 
personal aspects of their lives that they are letting slip. 


Delegated Projects If you’re a senior manager or executive, 
you probably have several projects that you are directly 
responsible for but have handed off to people who report to 
you. While you could, of course, put them on your Waiting 
For list, it might make better sense to create a “Projects— 
Delegated” list to track them. Your task will be simply to 
review the list regularly enough to ensure that everything 
on it is moving along appropriately. 


Specific Types of Projects 


The right amount of complexity is whatever creates optimal simplicity. 


Some people have as part of their work and lifestyle several 
different projects of the same type, which in some instances 
it may be valuable to group together as a sub-list of 
Projects. For example, a corporate trainer or a keynote 
speaker might maintain a separate category of “Projects— 
Presentations,” with a chronological listing of all the 
upcoming events of that nature. These would be “projects” 
like the rest, in that they need to be reviewed for actions 
until they are completed; but it might be helpful to see 
them all organized on one list, in the order they are coming 
up on the calendar, apart from the other projects. 

If you are a real estate agent, sell consulting services, or 
develop proposals for a relatively small number of 
prospective clients in any profession, you will likely find it 
useful to see all of your outstanding “sales relationships in 
progress” in one view. This could be a separate list ina 
planner or digital application, but to be optimally functional 
it would need to be complete and each item regularly 
reviewed for current actions. 

Some people like to sort their projects by major areas of 
focus—parents tracking those about their children, an 


entrepreneur dividing projects by the various roles he’s 
fulfilling (Finance, Sales, Operations), and the like. 

Again, how you decide to group your projects is not 
nearly as critical as ensuring that your inventory is 
complete, current, and assessed sufficiently to get it off 
your mind. No matter how you organize it now, you will very 
likely change your structure as you get more experience 
using your system and as the nature of your focus shifts in 
work and life. 


What About Subprojects? 


Some of your projects will likely have major subprojects, 
each of which could in theory be seen as a whole project. If 
you’re moving into a new residence, for instance, and are 
upgrading or changing much of what’s there, you may have 
a list of actionable items like “Finalize the patio,” “Upgrade 
the kitchen,” “Set up home office space,” and so on, all of 
which could in themselves be considered separate projects. 
Do you make all of this one entry on your Projects list—say, 
“Finish new home upgrades”—or do you write up each of 
the subprojects as an individual line item? 

Actually, it won’t matter, as long as you review all the 
components of the project as frequently as you need to in 
order to stay productive. No external tool or organizing 
format is going to be perfect for sorting both horizontally 
across and vertically down through all your projects; you'll 
still have to be aware of the whole in some cohesive way 
(such as via your Weekly Review). If you make the large 
project your one listing on your Projects list, you’ll want to 
keep a list of the subprojects and/or the project plan itself 
as “project support material” to be reviewed when you 
come to that major item. I would recommend doing it this 
way if big pieces of the project are dependent on other 
pieces getting done first. In that scenario you might have 


subprojects with no next actions attached to them because 
they are in a sense waiting for other things to happen 
before they can move forward. For instance, you might not 
be able to start on “Upgrade the kitchen” until you have 
finished “Assess and upgrade home electrical system.” Or, 
you can only afford one of your major home projects ata 
time, so keeping them lined up in order of your priorities 
would make sense. However, you might be able to proceed 
on “Finalize the patio” independent of the other 
subprojects. You would therefore want a next action to be 
continually current on any portion of this larger project that 
you could make progress on independently. 

Don’t be too concerned about which way is best. If you’re 
not sure, I’d vote for putting your big projects on the 
Projects list and holding the sub-pieces in your project 
support material, making sure to include them in your 
Weekly Review. That often makes it easier to see the larger 
field of what’s going on in your life from a higher 
perspective, at a glance. But if that arrangement doesn’t 
feel quite right, try including the active and independent 
subprojects as separate entries on your master list. 


How you list projects and subprojects is up to you; just be sure you 
know where to find all the moving parts and review them as frequently 
as needed to keep them off your mind. 


There’s no perfect system for tracking all your projects 
and subprojects the same way. You just need to know you 
have projects and, if they have associated components, 
where to find the appropriate reminders for them." 


Project Support Materials 


Project support materials are not project actions, and 
they’re not project reminders. They’re resources to support 
your actions and thinking about your projects. 


Don’t Use Support Material for Reminding 


What continues to talk to you psychologically in your environment, 
demanding that you do something about it? 


Typically, people use stacks of paper, stuffed file folders, 
and/or a plethora of e-mails and digital documents as 
reminders that (1) they’ve got a project, and (2) they’ve got 
to do something about it. They’re essentially making 
support materials serve as action reminders. The problem 
is that next actions and Waiting For items on these projects 
have usually not been determined and are psychologically 
still embedded in the stacks and the files and e-mails— 
giving them the aura of just more stuff that repels its 
(un)organizer instead of attracting him or her to action. It 
delivers an incessant subliminal chant: “Do something 
about me! Decide something about me! Follow up with 
something about me!” When you’re on the run, in the heat 
of the activities of the day, files like that are the last things 
you'll want to pick up and peruse for actions. You’ll actually 
go numb to the files and the piles because they don’t 
prompt you to do anything and they simply create more 
mental noise and emotional anxiety. 

If you’re in this kind of situation you must first add the 
project itself to your Projects list, as a reminder that there’s 
an outcome to be achieved. Then the action steps and 
Waiting For items must be put onto their appropriate action 
reminder lists. Finally, when it’s time to actually do an 
action, like making a call to someone about the project, you 


can pull out all the materials you think you might need to 
have as support during the conversation. 

To reiterate, you don’t want to use support materials as 
your primary reminders of what to do—that should be 
relegated to your action lists. If, however, the materials 
contain project plans and overviews in addition to ad hoc 
archival and reference information, you may want to keep 
them a little more visibly accessible than you do the pure 
reference materials in your filing cabinet or on your 
computer. These are fine to store support stuff, too, as long 
as you have the discipline to pull out the file drawer or open 
the computer to the proper directory and files and take a 
look at the plans every time you do your Weekly Review. If 
not, you’re better off storing those kinds of project support 
files (perhaps with printouts from computer files) in a 
standing file holder or a separate Pending stack tray on 
your desk or other visually available surface. 

To return to the previous example of moving into a new 
residence, you could have a folder labeled “Upgrades—37 
Pinkerton Place” containing all the plans and details and 
notes about the patio and kitchen and office area. In your 
Weekly Review, when you came to “Upgrade new 
residence” on your Projects list, you’d pull out the file for 
that project and thumb through all your notes to ensure 
that you weren’t missing any possible next actions. Those 
actions would then get done, delegated, or deferred to your 
action lists, and the folder would be refiled until you needed 
it again for doing the actions or for your next Weekly 
Review. 

Many people who interact with current and prospective 
clients have attempted to use client folders and/or client- 
relationship-management (CRM) software to “manage the 
account.” The problem here is that some material is just 
facts or historical data that needs to be stored as 
background for when you might be able to use it, and some 
of what must be tracked are the actions required to move 


the relationships forward. The latter can be more effectively 
organized within your action-lists system. Client information 
is just that, and it can be folded into a general-reference file 
on the client or stored within a clients-focused library. But if 
I need to call a client, I don’t want that reminder embedded 
anywhere but on a Calls list." 


Organizing Ad Hoc Project Thinking 


In chapter 3, I suggested that you will often have ideas that 
you'll want to keep about projects but that are not 
necessarily next actions. Those ideas fall into the broad 
category of “project support materials,” and may be 
anything from a notion about something you might want to 
do on your next vacation to a clarification of some major 
components in a project plan. These thoughts could come 
as you're driving down the freeway listening to a news story 
on the radio, or reading a relevant article. What do you do 
with that kind of material? 


There is no need ever to lose an idea about a project, theme, or topic. 


My recommendation here is that you consider where 
you’re keeping tabs on the project or topic itself, how you 
might add information to it in that format, and where you 
might store any more extensive data associated with it. 
Most professionals will have several options for how to 
handle support materials, including attaching notes to a list 
item, organizing digital information in e-mail and/or 
databases, and maintaining paper-based files and notes in 
notebooks. 


Attached Notes Most organizing software allows you to 
attach a digital note to a list or calendar entry. If you’re 


keeping a Projects list within the software, you can go to 
the project you had a thought about, open or attach a note 
to it, and type in your idea. This is an excellent way to 
capture “back of the envelope” project thinking. If your 
Projects list is paper based, you can attach a Post-it note 
next to the item on your master list or, if you’re a low-tech 
type, on the item’s separate sheet. In any case, you'll need 
to remember to look at the attachment when you review 
your project to make use of the data. 


E-mail and Software Applications The digital world offers 
an infinite variety of ways to deal with project thoughts. E- 
mails that might contain good information related to your 
projects can be held in a dedicated e-mail reference folder, 
labeled accordingly. If you have a large volume of e-mails 
related to one project, consider creating two folders: 
“Johnson Partnership—Active” and “Johnson Partnership— 
Archive,” or some such. You may also find it worthwhile, if 
you don’t have one already, to set up a more rigorous kind 
of digital database for organizing your thinking on a project 
or topic. An enormous flowering of such tools has happened 
in this century—from simple and elegant cloud-based note- 
taking and notebook-organizing software that permits 
infinite customization for how it’s used, to group-sharing 
file and project management systems, to personal project- 
organizing applications for everything from free-form mind 
mapping to organizing large writing and research 
endeavors. 


The inherent danger in the digital world is how much data can be 
spread into how many different places so easily, without coordinating 
links. 


The bad news about the good news of the huge 
assortment of options for digital project support is the ease 


with which we are seduced into spreading potentially 
meaningful information into such a multiplicity of locations 
and mechanisms that it can take us almost back to square 
one: we don’t know where it all is, can’t see it all integrated 
for appropriate overviewing from the right perspective at 
the right time, aren’t sure exactly how to put what data 
where... SO we wind up trying to keep it all coordinated 
back in our heads! I continually find interesting new ways 
to track relevant information for various things I’m doing, 
but I retain sanity only when I keep a clearly delineated and 
accessible Projects list and ensure that I’m scanning across 
any related parts of my system regularly for pertinent 
details. 


Paper-Based Files Having a separate file folder devoted to 
each project makes a lot of sense when you’re accumulating 
paper-based materials; it may be low-tech, but it’s an 
elegant solution nonetheless. Simplicity and ease of 
handling make for a good general-reference filing system— 
one that lets you feel comfortable about creating a folder 
for scraps of paper from a meeting. At times it’s easier to 
overview and access project-related information for 
planning sessions and conversations using a physical folder 
than trying to use the digital pieces themselves in the 
moment. I will often print all potentially useful items 
pertaining to the project—spreadsheets, schedules, e-mails, 
Web pages, etc.—to have in hand as reference for those 
kinds of interactions. 


Pages in Notebooks A great advantage of paper-based 
loose-leaf notebooks is that you can dedicate a whole page 
or group of pages to an individual project. For years I 
maintained a midsize notebook with a Projects list in front 
and a Project Support section toward the back, where I 
always had some blank pages to capture any random 
thinking or plans and details about projects on my list. 


Though paper-based personal system components are 
increasingly giving way to their digital counterparts, the 
notebook model is a valuable one, supporting a more 
integrated and multilevel platform for well-oriented 
thinking. 

Each of the methods previously described can be 
effective in organizing project thoughts. The key is that you 
must consistently look for any action steps inherent in your 
project notes, and review the notes themselves as often as 
you think it is necessary, given the nature of the project. 

You'll also want to clear out many of your notes once they 
become inactive, unreal, or redundant, to keep the whole 
system from catching the “stale” virus. I’ve found a lot of 
value in capturing these types of thoughts, more for the 
way it consistently helps my thinking process than because 
I end up using every idea (most I don’t!). But I try to make 
sure not to let my old thoughts stay around too long, 
pretending they’re useful when they’re not. 


Organizing Nonactionable Data 


Interestingly, one of the biggest problems with most 
people’s personal management systems is that they blend a 
few actionable things with a large amount of data and 
material that has value but no action attached. Having 
good, consistent structures with which to manage the 
nonactionable items in our work and lives is as important as 
Managing our action and project reminders. When the 
nonactionable items aren’t properly managed, they clog up 
the whole process. 

Nonactionable items fall into three large categories: 
reference materials, reminders of things that need no 
action now but might at a later date, and things that you 
don’t need at all (trash). 


Reference Materials 


Much of what comes across your desk and into your life in 
general is reference material. There’s no action required, 
but it’s information that you want to keep, for a variety of 
reasons. Your major decisions will be how much to keep, 
how much room to dedicate to it, what form it should be 
stored in, and where. Much of that will be a personal or 
organizational judgment call based upon legal or logistical 
concerns or personal preferences. The only time you should 
have attention on your reference material is when you need 
to change your system in some way because you have too 
much or too little information, given your needs or 
preferences. 

The problem most people have psychologically with all 
their stuff is that it’s still stuff—that is, they haven’t decided 
what’s actionable and what’s not. Once you’ve made a clean 
distinction about which is which, what’s left as reference 
should have no pull or incompletion associated with it—it’s 
just your library. Your only decision then is how big a library 
you want. When you’ve fully implemented this action- 
management methodology, you can be as big a pack rat as 
your space (physical and digital) will allow. As I’ve increased 
the size of the hard disk on my computer and added an 
almost infinite backup capability on attached drives and in 
the cloud, I’ve kept that much more e-mail in my archives 
and that many more digital photographs. The more the 
merrier, as far as I’m concerned, since increasing the 
volume of pure reference material adds no psychological 
weight. 


The Variety of Reference Systems 


Reference material now shows up in many forms (topics 
and media), with numerous ways to organize it. What 
follows is a brief discussion of some of the most common. 


e General-reference filing—paper, e-mail, and simple 
digital storage 

e Large-category filing 

¢ Contact managers 

e Libraries and archives 


Your reference and filing system should be a simple library of data, 
easily retrievable—not your reminder for actions, projects, priorities, or 
prospects. 


General-Reference Filing As I’ve emphasized in previous 
chapters, a good filing system is critical for processing and 
organizing your stuff. It’s also a must for dealing with the 
paper-based material and ad hoc digital information that 
are valuable to you for one reason or another, and you'll 
need a way to store both. Ideally you already set up a 
general-reference filing system as you were processing 
“in.” You need to feel comfortable storing even a single 
piece of paper that you might want to refer to later, or an 
article you read online, and your general-reference system 
must be informal and accessible enough that it’s a snap to 
file something away, right at hand where you do your work 
and personal administration and review. If you’re not set up 
that way yet, look back at chapter 4 for help on this topic. 
Most people wind up needing from one to four physical 
file drawers, many dozens of e-mail reference folders, and 
other digital storage locations and categories that can 
range from a few to hundreds.* The Web itself is nothing 
more than a huge digital filing cabinet, which both relieves 
the need to create your own digital reference library and 
produces a huge amount of the type of information that you 
will likely want to collect and organize within your own 
system. The ever-increasing plethora of information and 
ways to access and organize it only forces the necessity to 
distinguish nonactionable from actionable inputs, and to 


create and maintain an easily usable system of reference 
data storage. 


Large-Category Filing Any topic that requires more than 
fifty folders and/or major documents should probably be 
given its own section, drawer, or digital database, with its 
own alpha-sorted or other easily searchable system. For 
instance, if you’re managing a corporate merger and need 
to keep hold of a lot of the paperwork, you may want to 
dedicate two or three whole file cabinets to hold all the 
documentation required in the due-diligence process. If 
gardening or sailing or cooking is your passion, you may 
need at least a whole file drawer for each of those 
designated hobbies. 

Bear in mind that if your area of focus has support 
material that could blend into other areas of focus, you may 
run into the dilemma of whether to store the information in 
general reference or in the specialized reference files. 
When you read a great article about wood fencing and want 
to keep it, does that go in your Garden cabinet or in the 
general system with other information about home-related 
projects? As a rule, it’s best to stick with one general- 
reference system except for a very limited number of 
discrete topics. 


Contact Managers Much of the information that you need to 
keep is directly related to people in your network. You need 
to track contact information of all sorts—mobile, home, and 
office phone numbers, e-mail addresses, and so on. In 
addition, if you find it useful, you may want to maintain 
information about their birthdays, names of family 
members, hobbies, interests, etc. In a more rigorous 
professional vein, you may need or want to track hire dates, 
performance-review dates, goals and objectives, and other 
potentially relevant data for staff development and legal 
purposes. 


The “contacts” section of most of the digital and paper 
organizers (along with the calendar) has probably been the 
most commonly used component. Everyone needs to keep 
track of phone numbers and e-mail addresses. It’s 
instructive to note that this is purely and simply reference 
material. No action is required—this is just information that 
you might need to access in the future. As digital as the 
world seems to have become, many people still have stacks 
of collected business cards that are subtly yelling at them, 
“Decide something about me! Do something with me!” 

But once you have filtered actionable items out of those 
inputs, there’s no big mystery about how to organize 
contact information, aside from the logistics for your 
individual needs. Again, the only problem comes up when 
people try to make their contact manager serve as a tool for 
reminding them about things they need to do. That doesn’t 
work (unless it’s part of a well-functioning CRM system that 
includes both customer information and action triggers 
appropriately assigned and incorporated). As long as all the 
actions relative to people you know have been identified 
and tracked in your action reminder lists, there’s no role for 
a contact manager to fill other than being a data store. 

The only issue (or opportunity) then becomes how much 
information you need to keep and where and in what 
equipment you need to keep it in order to have it accessible 
when you want it. Nothing’s perfect in that regard, but as 
the mobile digital Internet-connected tools increase in 
power, along with their connection to various data stores, 
both the ease of access and the confusion of options will 
increase in this regard. 


Libraries and Archives: Personalized Levels 


If material is purely for reference, the only issue is whether it’s worth 
the time and space to keep it. 


Information that might be useful lives at many levels. You 
could probably find out pretty much anything if you were 
willing to dig deep enough. The question of how much to 
keep, how close, and in what form will be a changing reality, 
given the variables of your needs, your particular comfort 
levels with data, and the technology that turbocharges your 
relationship to global information. Relative to your personal 
organization and productivity, this is not a core issue, so 
long as all of your projects and actions are in a control 
system that you work with regularly. Reference material in 
all its forms then becomes nothing more or less than 
material to capture and create access to according to your 
particular proclivities, requirements, and capabilities. 

Some degree of consistency will always make things 
easier. What kinds of things do you need with you all the 
time? Those must go into your ubiquitously available mobile 
device or notebook. What do you need for meetings or off- 
site events? That should be put into your briefcase, pack, 
satchel, or purse. What might you need when you’re 
working in your office? That should be put into your 
personal filing system or your networked computer. What 
about rare situations relative to your job? Material needed 
for those could be archived in departmental files, off-site 
storage, or deep in the digital cloud. What could you find on 
the Web anytime you might need it? You don’t need to do 
anything with that information, unless you require it when 
you’re away from a good Internet connection, in which case 
you should print the data out when you’re online and store 
it in a file you can take with you. 

Do you see how that personal organization of reference 
material is simply a logistical and purpose-based one? 
Distinguishing actionable from nonactionable things is the 
first key success factor in this arena. Second is determining 
what your potential use of the information is, and therefore 
where and how it should be stored. Once these are 
addressed, you have total freedom to manage and organize 


as much or as little reference material as you want. There is 
no “perfect” reference system. Its structures and content 
demand a highly individual decision that ought to be based 
on the ratio of the value received to the time and effort 
required for capturing and maintaining it. You are better off 
starting with real information you want to keep, deciding 
the best place to put it so it’s retrievable, and crafting that 
from the ground up than trying to choose or design a 
system theoretically. You will definitely hone your reference 
libraries into a larger, more sensible framework as time 
goes on, but that will best be built from upgrading how 
you’re managing your day-to-day realities. Tolerate some 
ambiguity here, in terms of figuring out the best way to do 
it all. The key will be some regular overviewing and 
reassessment of your system, and dynamically course- 
correcting as needed. 


Someday/Maybes 


Someday/Maybes are not throwaway items. They may be some of the 
most interesting and creative things you'll ever get involved with. 


The second thing to deal with in organizing nonactionable 
items is how to track things that you want to reassess in the 
future. These could range from a special trip you might 
want to take one day, to books you might want to read, to 
projects you might want to tackle in the next fiscal year, to 
skills and talents you might want to develop. For a full 
implementation of this model you’ll need some sort of “back 
burner” or “on hold” component. 

There are several ways to stage things for later review, 
all of which will work to get them off your current radar and 
your mind. You can put the items on various versions of 


Someday/Maybe lists or trigger them on your calendar or in 
a digital or paper-based tickler system. 


Someday/Maybe List 


It’s highly likely that if you did a complete mind sweep when 
you were collecting things from your mental space, you 
came up with some things you’re not sure you want to 
commit to. “Learn Spanish,” “Get Marcie a horse,” “Climb 
Mt. Washington,” “Write a mystery novel,” and “Geta 
vacation cottage” are typical projects that fall into this 
category. 

If you haven’t already done it, I recommend that you 
create a Someday/Maybe list in whatever organizing system 
you’ve chosen. Then give yourself permission to populate 
that list with all the items of that type that have occurred to 
you so far. You'll probably discover that simply having the 
list and starting to fill it out will cause you to come up with 
all kinds of creative ideas. 


Activating and maintaining your Someday/Maybe category unleashes 
the flow of your creative thinking—you have permission to imagine 
cool things to do without having to commit to doing anything about 
them yet. 


You may also be surprised to find that some of the things 
you write on the list will actually come to pass, almost 
without your making any conscious effort to make them 
happen. If you acknowledge the power of the imagination to 
foster changes in perception and performance, it’s easy to 
see how having a Someday/Maybe list out in front of your 
conscious mind could potentially add many wonderful 
adventures to your life and work. We’re likely to seize 
opportunities when they arise if we’ve already identified 
and captured them as a possibility. That has certainly been 


my own experience: learning to play the flute and how to 
sail in the open ocean started in this category for me. In 
addition to your in-tray, there are two rich sources to tap 
for your Someday/Maybe list: your creative imagination and 
your list of current projects. 


Make an Inventory of Your Creative Imaginings What are 
the things you really might want to do someday if you have 
the time, money, and inclination? Write them on your 
Someday/Maybe list. Typical categories include: 


e Things to get or build for your home 

e Hobbies to take up 

e Skills to learn 

e Creative expressions to explore 

e Clothes and accessories to buy 

e Toys (hi-tech and otherwise!) to acquire 
e Trips to take 

¢« Organizations to join 

e Service projects to contribute to 

e« Things to see and do 


Reassess Your Current Projects Now’s a good time to 
review your Projects list from a more elevated perspective 
(that is, the standpoint of your job, goals, and personal 
commitments) and consider whether you might transfer 
some of your current commitments to Someday/Maybe. If 
on reflection you realize that an optional project doesn’t 
have a chance of getting your attention for the next few 
months or more, move it to this list. 

People have at times found it useful even to 
subcategorize their Someday/Maybe projects. There might 
be a significant difference for you to think about projects 
you really want to do around your home as soon as you have 
the resources versus your “bucket list” kind of fantasies, 
such as climbing a mountain in Nepal or creating a 


foundation for disadvantaged kids. In a company this might 
be a distinction between “parking lot” ideas (“Let’s save 
that to discuss at our next quarterly meeting”) and keeping 
track of the projects you might energize when and if 
significant capital shows up. The key here is to pay 
attention, as you experiment with these options, to whether 
your lists and subcategories are unnerving or energizing 
you. 


Special Categories of Someday/Maybe 


More than likely you have some special interests that 
involve lots of possible things to do. It can be fun to collect 
these on lists. For instance: 


« Food—recipes, menus, restaurants, wines 

e Children—things to do with them 

¢« Books to read 

e Music to download 

e Movies to see 

e Gift ideas 

e Web sites to explore 

e Weekend trips to take 

e Ideas—Misc. (meaning you don’t know where else to 
put them!) 


These kinds of lists can be a cross between reference and 
Someday/Maybe—reference because you can just collect 
and add to lists of good wines or restaurants or books, to 
consult as you like; Someday/Maybe because you might 
want to review the listed items on a regular basis to remind 
yourself to try one or more of them at some point. 

In any case, this is another great reason to have an 
organizing system that makes it easy to capture things that 
may add value and variety and interest to your life—without 


clogging your mind and work space with undecided, 
unfinished business. 


The Danger of “Hold and Review” Files and Piles 


What lies in our power to do, lies in our power not to do. 


—Aristotle 


Many people have created some sort of “Hold and Review” 
pile or file (or whole drawer or e-mail folder) that vaguely 
fits within the category of Someday/Maybe. They tell 
themselves, “When I have time, I may like to get to this,” 
and a “Hold and Review” file seems a convenient place to 
put it. I personally don’t recommend this particular kind of 
subsystem, because in virtually every case I have come 
across, the person held but didn’t review, and there was 
numbness and resistance about the stack and contents. The 
value of someday/maybe disappears if you don’t put your 
conscious awareness back onto it with some consistency. 

Also, there’s a big difference between something that’s 
managed well, as a Someday/Maybe list, and something 
that’s just a catchall bucket for stuff. Usually much of that 
stuff needs to be tossed, some of it needs to go into 
Read/Review, some needs to be filed as reference, some 
belongs on the calendar or in a tickler file (see page 182) 
for review in a month or perhaps at the beginning of the 
next quarter, and some items actually have next actions on 
them. Many times, after appropriately processing 
someone’s “Hold and Review” drawer or file, I’ve 
discovered there was nothing left in it! 


Using the Calendar for Future Options 


Your calendar can be a very handy place to park reminders 
of things you might want to consider doing in the future. 
Most of the people I’ve coached were not nearly as 
comfortable with their calendars as they could have been; 
otherwise they probably would have found many more 
things to put in there. 

One of the three uses of a calendar is for day-specific 
information. This category can include a number of things, 
but one of the most creative ways to utilize the calendar 
function is to enter things that you want to take off your 
mind and reassess at some later date. Here are a few of the 
myriad things you should consider inserting: 


¢ Triggers for activating projects 
e Events you might want to participate in 
e Decision catalysts 


Triggers for Activating Projects If you have a project that 
you don’t really need to think about now but that deserves a 
flag at some point in the future, you can pick an appropriate 
date and put a reminder about the project in your calendar 
for that day. It should go in some day-specific (versus time- 
specific) calendar slot for the things you want to be 
reminded of on that day; then when the day arrives, you see 
the reminder and insert the item as an active project on 
your Projects list. Typical candidates for this treatment are: 


e Special events with a certain lead time for handling 
(product launches, fund-raisers, etc.) 

e Regular events that you need to prepare for, such as 
budget reviews, annual conferences, planning events, 
or meetings (e.g., when should you add next year’s 
“Annual sales conference” or “Get kids set up for next 
school year” to your Projects list?) 

e Key dates for significant people that you might want to 
do something about (birthdays, anniversaries, holiday 


gift giving, etc.) 


Events You Might Want to Participate In You probably get 
notices constantly about seminars, conferences, speeches, 
and social and cultural events that you may want to decide 
about attending as the time gets closer. So figure out when 
that closer time is and put a trigger in your calendar on the 
appropriate date—for example: 


“Chamber of Commerce breakfast tomorrow?” 
“Lions football tickets go on sale today” 

“BBC special on climate change at 8:00 p.m.” 
“Garden Club tea next Saturday” 


If you can think of any jogs like these that you’d like to 
put into your system, do it now. 


It’s OK to decide not to decide—as long as you have a decide-not-to- 
decide system. 


Decision Catalysts Once in a while there may be a 
significant decision that you need to make but can’t (or 
don’t want to) right away. That’s fine, in terms of your own 
selfmanagement process, as long as you’ve concluded that 
the additional information you need has to come from an 
internal rather than an external source (e.g., you need to 
sleep on it), or there is a good reason to delay your decision 
until a last responsible moment (allowing all factors to be as 
current as possible before you choose how to move on it). 
But in order to move to a level of OK-ness about not 
deciding, you’d better put out a safety net that you can 
trust to get you to focus on the issue appropriately in the 
future. A calendar reminder can serve that purpose.— 

Some typical decision areas in this category include: 


Hire/fire 
Merge/acquire/sell/divest 
Change job/career 

Potential strategy redirection 


This is a big topic to devote so little space to, I know, but 
go ahead and ask yourself, “Is there any major decision for 
which I should create a future trigger, so I can feel 
comfortable just ‘hanging out’ with it for now?” If there is, 
put some reminder in your calendar to revisit the issue. 


The “Tickler” File 


One elegant way to manage nonactionable items that may 
need an action in the future is the tickler file.* A three- 
dimensional version of a calendar, the original version of 
this allows you to hold physical reminders of things that you 
want to see or remember—not now, but in the future. It can 
be an extremely functional tool, allowing you to in effect set 
up your own postal service and “mail” things to yourself for 
receipt on a designated future date. I have used a tickler 
file for years. Even though technology has made reminders 
of this sort more easily digitized in software and mobile 
access devices, it’s possible that numerous things for you 
are more easily managed in this low-tech manner. The 
promise of digital management of such things is marching 
forward incessantly, but there remain many things in my 
personal system that are more efficiently managed by 
physical particles as reminders. 

Essentially the tickler file is a simple file-folder system 
that allows you to distribute paper and other physical 
reminders in such a way that whatever you want to see ona 
particular date in the future “automatically” shows up that 
day in your in-tray. 


If you have a secretary or assistant, you can entrust at 
least a part of this task to him or her, assuming that he or 
she has some working version of this or a similar system. 
Typical examples would be: 


e “Hand me this agenda the morning of the day I have the 
meeting.” 

e “Give this back to me on Monday to rethink, since it 
applies to our board meeting on Wednesday.” 

e “Remind me about the Hong Kong trip two weeks 
ahead, and we'll plan the logistics.” 


Then every day of the week, that day’s folder is pulled 
and reviewed. 

Even if you are in a high-level professional role, while you 
can (and probably should) utilize staff to handle as much of 
this as is appropriate, I recommend that, if you can 
integrate it into your lifestyle, you maintain your own tickler 
file functionality. There are many useful things you can do, 
at least some of which you may want to avail yourself of 
outside the pale of your assistant’s responsibilities. I use my 
tickler file to manage travel documents I need at hand ona 
certain day, reminders of birthdays and special events 
upcoming (that would take up too much visual room on my 
digital calendar), printouts of interesting things to explore 
when I might have more time in a couple of months, etc. 

Bottom line: the tickler file demands only a one-second- 
per-day new behavior to make it work, and it has a payoff 
value exponentially greater than the personal investment. It 
represents a unique executive function: deciding not to 
decide until a certain point. 


Setting Up a Tickler File If you are doing this in a physical 
system, you need forty-three folders—thirty-one labeled “1” 
through “31,” and twelve more labeled with the names of 
the months of the year. The daily files are kept in front, 


beginning with the file for tomorrow’s date (if today is 
October 5, then the first file would be “6”). The succeeding 
daily files represent the days of the rest of the month (“6” 
through “31”). Behind the “31” file is the monthly file for 
the next month (“November”), and behind that are the daily 
files “1” through “5.” Following that are the rest of the 
monthly files (“December” through “October”). The next 
daily file is emptied into your in-tray every day, and then the 
folder is refiled at the back of the dailies (at which point, 
instead of October 6, it represents November 6). In the 
Same way, when the next monthly file reaches the front (on 
October 31 after you empty the daily file, the “November” 
file will be the next one, with the daily files “1” through “31” 
behind it), it’s emptied into the in-tray and refiled at the 
back of the monthlies to represent November a year from 
now. This is a perpetual file, meaning that at any given time 
it contains files for the next thirty-one days and the next 
twelve months. 

The big advantage of using file folders for your tickler 
system is that they allow you to store actual documents (the 
form that needs to be filled out on a certain day, the 
meeting agenda that needs to be reviewed then, the invoice 
that you’re holding payment on until that day, etc.). 























FILE-FOLDER-STYLE SETUP (OCTOBER 5) 


In order for the system to work, you must check and 
update it every day. If you forget to empty the daily file, you 
won’t trust the system to handle important data, and you'll 
have to manage those things some other way. If you leave 
town (or don’t access the file on the weekend), you must be 
sure to check the folders for the days you'll be away, before 
you go. 


Checklists: Creative and Constructive 
Reminders 


The last topic in personal system organization that deserves 
some attention is the care and feeding of checklists, those 
“recipes of potential ingredients” for projects, work 
processes and procedures, events, and areas of value, 
interest, and responsibility. In essence, any of the lists or 
categories of reminders we’ve already discussed are 
checklists, in that they serve the function of providing 
things to check or review to ensure that you’re not missing 
something in that area. The more common idea of 
checklists, however, refers to a listing of the contents of a 
topic, procedure, or some arena of interest or activity, to be 
utilized either at a specific time or whenever you engage in 
a particular kind of activity. These can range from big- 
picture outlines of areas of focus in your job or your life 
down to the detailed instructions of how to load pictures 
onto a Web site. 

Many years ago Alfred North Whitehead cogently 
observed, “Civilization advances by extending the number 
of important operations which we can perform without 
thinking about them.” Checklists provide the micro version 
of that macro observation: whenever you have to think 
about anything, either because of some regularity of a 
refreshed view (“At the end of every calendar year, I 
want/need to...”) or a specific situation that requires more 


detail than you can easily recall (“Before I deliver a 
seminar, I need to...”), you should entrust those jobs to 
your “external mind”—your management system that holds 
the details you need to engage with at appropriate times.- 

There are an infinite number of possible checklists that 
allow you to have more relaxed control in various situations 
across your life and work. If you ever refer to a recipe ina 
cookbook in order to prepare a specific dish, you’re using a 
checklist to boost your focus and productivity. If your board 
has tasked you with three key initiatives or outcomes for 
the year, reviewing those prior to your board meeting 
would be utilizing a checklist. 

Because I am describing the process of clarifying and 
organizing what may be on your mind, to begin to 
implement this system I’ll focus on a common set of topics 
that emerge for people, for which checklists are often the 
best solution. 


Things You Want to Pay Attention To 


Often, when we are working with people to clear up what is 
on their minds, what shows up are things like this: 


Exercise more regularly 

Spend more quality time with my kids 

Do more proactive planning for my division 

Maintain good morale on my team 

Ensure we’re in alignment with corporate strategy 
Keep the client billing process up-to-date 

Focus more on my spiritual practices 

Pay more attention to the individual goals of my staff 
members 

e Keep myself motivated in my job 


e Keep current conversations and updates going with key 
people in my company 


What should you do with these “fuzzier” kinds of internal 
commitments and areas of attention? 


First, Identify Inherent Projects and Action 


For much of this kind of stuff, there is still a project and/or 
an action that needs to be defined. “Exercise more 
regularly” really translates for many people into “Set up 
regular exercise program” (project) and “Call Sally for 
suggestion about gyms and personal trainers” (real action 
step). In such cases, inherent projects and actions still need 
to be clarified and organized into a personal system. Or 
“Maintain good morale on my team” should become a 
project (“Explore team-building processes for my 
department”) with a specific action step (“E-mail our HR 
director to get her input on this opportunity”). 

But there are some things that don’t quite fit into that 
category, and often, appropriate checklists are needed to 
address them. 


Blueprinting Key Areas of Work and Accountability 


Objectives like “Maintain good physical conditioning” or 
“Keep my team motivated” may still need to be built into 
some sort of overview checklist that will be reviewed 
regularly. You have multiple layers of outcomes and 
standards playing on your psyche and your choices at any 
point in time, and knowing what those are, at all the 
different levels, is always a good idea (and yet not so easy to 
habitually maintain and adhere to). 


I suggested earlier that there are at least six levels of 
your “work” that could be defined and that each level 
deserves its own acknowledgment and evaluation. A 
complete inventory of everything you hold important and 
are committed to on each of these levels would represent 
an awesome checklist. It might include: 


Career goals 
Service 

Family 
Relationships 
Community 

Health and energy 
Financial resources 
Creative expression 


And then moving down a level, within your job, you might 
want some reminders of your key areas of responsibility, 
your staff, your values, and so on. A list of these might 
contain points like: 


Team morale 
Processes 
Timelines 

Staff issues 
Workload 
Communications 
Technology 


All of these items could in turn be included on the lists in 
your personal system, as reminders to you, as needed, to 
keep the ship on course, on an even keel. Many times the 
value is simply to affirm that the specific area is OK as is; 
nothing needs to be added or changed. But knowing that 
adds to your relaxed focus. 


The More Novel the Situation, the More Control 
Required 


The degree to which any of us needs to maintain checklists 
and external controls is directly related to our unfamiliarity 
with the area of responsibility. If you’ve been doing what 
you’re doing for a long time, and there’s no pressure on you 
to change in that area, you probably need minimal external 
personal organization to stay on cruise control. You know 
when things must happen and how to make them happen, 
and your system is fine, status quo. You could manage those 
in your sleep. Often, though, that’s not the case. 

Did you ever have to go through some prescribed 
procedure to manage a discrete kind of financial 
transaction, log in and refresh a software application, or 
even go through several necessary steps to check in toa 
friend’s vacation cabin, and you had the experience of 
asking yourself, “Wait a minute, what do I need to do, now?” 
In any of those situations you may want or need to repeat, 
you need a checklist. I am dangerously semiliterate in terms 
of computers and software, and whenever I get instruction 
from our IT experts about how to fix some recurring glitch, 
it is easy to convince myself I will remember what they told 
me. I have learned (too many times the hard way) to create 
checklists for them. 


Checklists can be highly useful to let you Know what you don’t need to 
be concerned about. 


Many times you’ll want some sort of checklist to help you 
maintain a focus until you’re more familiar with what you’re 
doing. If your CEO suddenly disappeared, for example, and 
you instantly had to fill her shoes, you’d need some 
overview and outlines in front of you for a while to ensure 
that you had all the mission-critical aspects of the job 


handled. And if you’ve just been hired into a new position, 
with new responsibilities that are relatively unfamiliar to 
you, you'll want a framework of control and structure, if 
only for the first few months. As we have instituted a novel 
organizational structure and operating system in our 
company, we have been using many critical checklists to 
support our meeting practices for its implementation, until 
they become automatic. 

There have been times when I needed to make a list of 
areas that I had to handle temporarily, until things were 
under control. For instance, when my wife and I decided to 
create a brand-new structure for a business we’d been 
involved with for many years, I took on areas of 
responsibility I’d never had to deal with before—namely, 
accounting, computers, marketing, legal, and 
administration. For several months I needed to keep a 
checklist of those responsibilities in front of me to ensure 
that I filled in the blanks everywhere and managed the 
transition as well as I could. After the business got onto 
“cruise control” to some degree, I no longer needed that 
list. 


Checklists at All Levels 


Be open to creating any kind of checklist as the urge strikes 
you. The possibilities are endless—from “Core Life Values” 
to “Things to Take Camping” to “Potential Holiday Gifts.” 
Making lists, ad hoc, as they occur to you, is one of the most 
powerful yet subtlest and simplest procedures that you can 
install in your life. 

To spark your creative thinking, here’s a list of some of 
the topics of checklists I’ve seen and used over the years: 


e Job Areas of Responsibility (key responsibility areas) 


Exercise Regimens (muscle resistance training 

programs) 

e Travel Checklist (everything to take on or do before a 
trip) 

e Weekly Review (everything to review and/or update on 

a weekly basis) 

Training Program Components (all the things to handle 

when putting on an event, front to back) 

e Key Clients 

e People to Stay in Touch With (all the people you might 
want to connect with in your network) 

e Year-end Activities (all the actions for closing up for the 

time period) 

Personal Development (things to evaluate regularly to 

ensure personal balance and progress) 

e Jokes 


Get comfortable with checklists, both ad hoc and more 
permanent. Be ready to create and eliminate them as 
required. Make sure you have an easily accessed place to 
put a new list that’s also attractive and even fun to engage 
with—in a loose-leaf notebook or in a software application 
that is readily available. Appropriately used, checklists can 
be a tremendous asset in enhancing personal productivity 
and relieving mental pressure. 


Capability and willingness to instantly make a checklist, accessible and 
used when needed, is a core component of high-performance self- 
management. 


If in fact you have now captured everything that 
represents an open loop in your life and work, clarified and 
processed each one of those items in terms of what it means 
to you and what actions are required, and organized the 
results into an intact system that holds a current and 


complete overview—large and small—of all your present 
and “someday” projects, then you’re ready for the next step 
of implementation in the art of stress-free productivity: the 
reflection process. 


Reflecting: Keeping It All Fresh 
and Functional 


THE Purpose oF this whole method of workflow management is 
not to let your brain become lax, but rather to enable it to 
be free to experience more elegant, productive, and 
creative activity. In order to earn that freedom, however, 
your brain must engage on some consistent basis with all 
your commitments and activities. You must be assured that 
you’re doing what you need to be doing, and that it’s OK to 
be not doing what you’re not doing. That facilitates the 
condition of being present, which is always the optimal state 
from which to operate. Reviewing your system on a regular 
basis, reflecting on the contents, and keeping it current and 
functional are prerequisites for that kind of clarity and 
stability. 

If you have a list of calls you must make, for example, the 
minute that list is not totally current with all the calls you 
need to make, your brain will not trust the system, and it 
won't get relief from its lower-level mental tasks. It will 
have to take back the job of remembering, processing, and 
reminding, which, as you should know by now, it doesn’t do 
very effectively. 

All of this means your system cannot be static. In order to 
support appropriate action choices, it must be kept up-to- 
date. And it should trigger consistent and appropriate 
evaluation of your life and work at several horizons. 


There are two major issues that need to be handled at 
this point: 


e What do you look at in all this, and when? 

e What do you need to do, and how often, to ensure that 
all of it works as a consistent system, freeing you to 
think and manage at a higher level? 


A real review process will lead to enhanced and 
proactive new thinking in key areas of your life and work. 
Such thinking emerges from both focused concentration 
and serendipitous brainstorming, which will be triggered 
and galvanized by a consistent personal review of your 
inventory of actions and projects. 


What to Look At, When 


Your personal system and behaviors need to be established 
in such a way that you can see all the action options you 
need to see, when you need to see them. This is really just 
common sense, but few people actually have their 
processes and their organization honed to the point where 
they are as functional as they could be. 

When you have access to a phone and any discretionary 
time, you ought to at least glance at the list of all the phone 
calls you need to make, and then either direct yourself to 
the best one to handle or give yourself permission to feel 
OK about not bothering with any of them. When you’re 
about to go in for a discussion with your boss or your 
partner, take a moment to review the outstanding agendas 
you have with him or her, so you'll know that you’re using 
your time most effectively. When you need to pick up 
something at the dry cleaner, first quickly review all the 
other errands that you might be able to do en route. 


A few seconds a day is usually all you need for review, as long as 
you're looking at a sufficient amount of the right things at the right 
time. 


People often ask me, “How much time do you spend 
looking at your system?” My answer is simply, “As much 
time as I need to feel comfortable about what I’m doing.” In 
actuality it’s an accumulation of two seconds here, three 
seconds there. What most people don’t realize is that my 
lists are in one sense my Office. Just as you might have Post- 
its and stacks of documents that represent work to do at 
your workstation, so do Ion my Next Actions lists and 
calendar. Assuming that you’ve completely collected, 
processed, and organized your stuff, you'll most likely take 
only a few brief moments here and there to access your 
system for day-to-day reminders. 


Look at Your Calendar First... 


Your most frequent review will probably be of your daily 
calendar, and your daily tickler folder if you’re maintaining 
one, to see the “hard landscape” and assess what has to get 
done. You need to know the time and space parameters 
first. Knowing that you have nonstop meetings from eight 
a.m. to six p.m., for example, with barely a half-hour break 
for lunch, will help you make necessary decisions about any 
other activities. 


.. » Then Your Action Lists 


The maintenance of life and the pursuit of happiness are not two 
separate issues. 


—Ayn Rand 


After you review all your day- and time-specific 
commitments and handle whatever you need to about them, 
your next most frequent area for review will be the lists of 
all the actions you could possibly do in your current context. 
If you’re in your office, for instance, you’ll look at your lists 
of calls, computer actions, and in-office things to do. This 
doesn’t necessarily mean you will be doing anything on 
those lists; you’ll just evaluate them against the flow of 
other work coming at you to ensure that you make the best 
choices about what to deal with. You need to feel confident 
that you’re not missing anything critical. 

Frankly, if your calendar is trustworthy and your action 
lists are current, they may be the only things in the system 
you'll need to refer to more than every couple of days. 
There have been many days when I didn’t need to look at 
any of my lists, in fact, because it was clear from the front 
end—my calendar—what I wouldn’t be able to do. 


The Right Review in the Right Context 


You may need to access any one of your lists at any time. 
When you and your life partner are decompressing at the 
end of the day, and you want to be sure you'll take care of 
the “business” the two of you manage together about home, 
family, and/or personal life, you’ll want to look at your 
accumulated agendas for him or her. On the other hand, if 
your boss pops in for a face-to-face conversation about 
current realities and priorities, it will be highly functional 
for you to have your Projects list up-to-date and your 
Agenda list for him or her right at hand. When you suddenly 
get a text invitation for an unplanned but highly strategic 
lunch meeting with a potential client who just showed up, 


how fast can you “clear the deck,” print relevant data, and 
renegotiate other commitments to be fully present for that 
engagement, which, if it goes well, may extend into the 
afternoon? 


Updating Your System 


To make knowledge productive, we will have to learn to see both 
forest and tree. We will have to learn to connect. 


—Peter F Drucker 


The real trick to ensuring the trustworthiness of the whole 
organization system lies in regularly refreshing your 
thinking and your system from a more elevated perspective. 
That’s impossible to do, however, if your lists fall too far 
behind your reality. You won’t be able to fool yourself about 
this: if your system is out of date, your brain will be forced 
to fully engage again at the lower level of remembering. 

This is perhaps the biggest challenge of all. Once you’ve 
tasted what it’s like to have a clear head and feel in control 
of everything that’s going on, can you do what you need to 
do to maintain that as an operational standard? The many 
years I’ve spent researching and implementing this 
methodology with countless people have proved to me that 
the magic key to the sustainability of the process is the 
Weekly Review. 


The Power of the Weekly Review 


If you’re like me and most other people, no matter how 
good your intentions may be, you’re going to have the world 


come at you faster than you can keep up. Many of us seem 
to have it in our natures to consistently entangle ourselves 
in more than we have the ability to handle. We book 
ourselves in back-to-back meetings all day, go to after-hours 
events that generate ideas and commitments we need to 
deal with, and get embroiled in engagements and projects 
that have the potential to spin our creative intelligence into 
cosmic orbits. 


You will invariably take in more opportunities than your system can 
process on a daily basis. 


That whirlwind of activity is precisely what makes the 
Weekly Review so valuable. It builds in some capturing, 
reevaluation, and reprocessing time to keep you in balance. 
There is simply no way to do this necessary regrouping 
while you’re trying to get everyday work done. 

The Weekly Review will also sharpen your intuitive focus 
on your important projects as you deal with the flood of new 
input and potential distractions coming at you the rest of 
the week. You’re going to have to learn to say no—faster, 
and to more things—in order to stay afloat and comfortable. 
Having some dedicated time in which to at least get up to 
the project level of thinking goes a long way toward making 
that easier. 


What Is the Weekly Review? 


Very simply, the Weekly Review is whatever you need to do 
to get your head empty again and get oriented for the next 
couple of weeks. It’s going through the steps of workflow 
management—capturing, clarifying, organizing, and 
reviewing all your outstanding commitments, intentions, 
and inclinations—until you can honestly say, “I absolutely 


know right now everything I’m not doing but could be doing 
if I decided to.” 

From a practical standpoint, here is the three-part drill 
that can get you there: get clear, get current, and get 
creative. Getting clear will ensure that all your collected 
stuff is processed. Getting current will ensure that all your 
orienting “maps” or lists are reviewed and up-to-date. The 
creative part happens to some degree automatically, as you 
get clear and current—you will naturally be generating 
ideas and perspectives that will be adding value to your 
thinking about work and life. 


Get Clear 


This is the initial stage of gathering up all the loose ends 
that have been generated in the course of your busy week. 
Notes taken in meetings, receipts and business cards 
you’ve collected, notices from your kids’ schools, and all the 
miscellaneous inputs that, in spite of yourself, have 
accumulated in all the weird little pockets and places in 
your purse, briefcase, smartphone texts, jacket, and on your 
dressing-room counter, in addition to what’s shown up in 
your standard input channels like your e-mail in-tray and 
social media. 


Collect Loose Papers and Materials Pull out all 
miscellaneous pieces of paper, business cards, receipts, and 
so on that have crept into the crevices of your desk, 
clothing, and accessories. Put it all in your in-tray for 
processing. 


Get “In” to Empty Review any meeting notes and 
miscellaneous scribbles on notepaper or in your mobile 
devices. Decide and list any action items, projects, waiting- 
fors, calendar events, and someday/maybes, as appropriate. 


File any reference notes and materials. Get the “in” areas of 
e-mails, texts, and voice mails to zero. Be ruthless with 
yourself, processing all notes and thoughts relative to 
interactions, projects, new initiatives, and input that have 
come your way since your last download, and purging those 
not needed. 


Empty Your Head Put into writing or text (in appropriate 
categories) any new projects, action items, waiting-fors, 
someday/maybes, and so forth that you haven’t yet 
captured and clarified. 


Get Current 


You need to “pull up the rear guard” now and eliminate 
outdated reminders in your system and get your active lists 
up-to-date and complete. Here are the steps: 


Review “Next Actions” Lists Mark off completed actions. 
Review for reminders of further action steps to record. 
Many times I’ve been moving so fast I haven’t had a chance 
to mark off many completed items on my list, much less 
figure out what to do next. This is the time to do that. 


Review Previous Calendar Data Review the past two to 
three weeks of calendar entries in detail for remaining or 
emergent action items, reference information, and so on, 
and transfer that data into the active system. Grab every 
“Oh! That reminds me... !” with its associated actions. You 
will likely notice meetings and events that you attended, 
which trigger thoughts of what to do next about the 
content. Be able to archive your past calendar with nothing 
left uncaptured. 


Review Upcoming Calendar Look at further calendar 
entries (long- and short-term). Capture actions about 


projects and preparations required for upcoming events. 
Your calendar is one of the best checklists to review 
regularly, to prevent last-minute stress and trigger creative 
front-end thinking.* Upcoming travel, conferences, 
meetings, holidays, etc. should be assessed for projects to 
add to your “Projects” and “Next Actions” lists for any of 
those situations that are already on your radar but not yet 
on cruise control. 


Review “Waiting For” List Any needed follow-up? Need to 
send an e-mail to get a status on it? Need to add an item to 
someone’s Agenda list to update when you'll talk with him 
or her? Record any next actions. Check off any already 
received. 


Review “Projects” (and “Larger Outcome”) Lists Evaluate 
the status of projects, goals, and outcomes, one by one, 
ensuring that at least one current kick-start action for each 
is in your system. Browse through any active and relevant 
project plans, support materials, and any other work-in- 
progress material to trigger new actions, completions, 
waiting-fors, etc. 


Review Any Relevant Checklists Is there anything else that 
you haven’t done, that you need or want to do, given your 
various engagements, interests, and responsibilities? 


Get Creative 


This methodology is not simply about cleaning up and 
getting closure. Those are critical factors, to be sure, to 
utilize for clarity and focus. Ultimately, though, the prime 
driver for my own exploration in this field has been creating 
the space to catalyze and access new, creative, and valuable 
thinking and direction. To a great extent, that’s actually not 
something you need to exert a lot of energy to achieve, if 


you have gotten this far in implementing this methodology. 
We are naturally creative beings, invested in our existence 
to live, grow, express, and expand. The challenge is not to 
be creative—it’s to eliminate the barriers to the natural flow 
of our creative energies. Practically speaking, it’s about 
getting your act together, letting spontaneous ideas 
emerge, capturing them, and utilizing their value. If you, in 
the process of reading and applying any of these 
techniques, have had any kind of “Aha! That reminds 
me...” or “Hmmm, I think I might want to... ,” because 
you externalized your thinking and reflected on it, then 
you’re already demonstrating the naturalness of this 
process. 


“Point of view” is that quintessentially human solution to information 
overload, an intuitive process of reducing things to an essential 
relevant and manageable minimum... . In a world of hyperabundant 
content, point of view will become the scarcest of resources. 


—FPaul Saffo 


As I said, there may not be anything you need to focus on 
at this point, since probably most of your creative thinking 
will have already shown up and been integrated in this 
process. However, there are a couple of additional triggers 
that you might find valuable to finish off this process. 


Review “Someday/Maybe” List Check for any projects that 
may have become more interesting or valuable to activate, 
and transfer them to Projects. Delete any that have simply 
stayed around much longer than they should, as the world 
and your interest have changed enough to take them off 
even this informal radar. Add any emerging possibilities 
that you’ve just started thinking about. 


Be Creative and Courageous Are there any new, wonderful, 
harebrained, creative, thought-provoking, risk-taking ideas 
you can capture and add into your system, or “external 
brain”? 

This review process is common sense, but few of us do it 
as well or consistently as we could, which means as 
regularly as we should to keep a clear mind and a sense of 
relaxed control. Granted, its scope is daunting, especially if 
you haven’t yet structured and populated your personal 
system to have reasonably current and complete data. And 
even if you have a decent center of control, given the 
pressures and demands of your day-to-day world, seldom is 
it obvious or easy to make this kind of reflection and 
recalibration event happen. 


The Right Time and Place for the Review 


The Weekly Review is so critical that it behooves you to 
establish good habits, environments, and tools to support it. 
Once your comfort zone has been established for the kind of 
relaxed control that Getting Things Done is all about, you 
won’t have to worry too much about making yourself do 
your review—you'll have to, in order to get back to your 
personal standards again. 

Until then, do whatever you need to, once a week, to 
trick yourself into backing away from the daily grind for a 
couple of hours—not to zone out, but to rise up at least to 
the horizon of all your projects and their statuses, and to 
catch up with everything else that relates to what’s pulling 
on your attention. 

If you have the luxury of an office or work space that can 
be somewhat isolated from the people and interactions of 
the day, and if you have anything resembling a typical five- 
day workweek, I recommend that you block out two hours 


early in the afternoon of your last workday for the review. 
Three factors make this an ideal time: 


e The events of the week are likely to be still fresh 
enough for you to be able to do a complete postmortem 
(“Oh, yeah, I need to make sure I get back to her 
about...”). 

e When you (invariably) uncover actions that require 

reaching people at work, youll still have time to do that 

before they leave for the weekend. 

It’s great to clear your mental decks so you can go into 

the weekend ready for refreshment and recreation, 

with nothing else pulling on you unnecessarily. 


You may be the kind of person, however, who doesn’t 
have normal weekends. I, for example, often have as much 
to do on those days as I do midweek. But I do have the 
luxury(?) of enduring frequent long plane trips, which 
provide an ideal opportunity for me to catch up. Many 
people have tailored their own Weekly Review habits to fit 
with their lifestyles, ranging from a standard time at their 
favorite coffeehouse every Saturday morning to the time on 
Sunday they sat in the rear of their church during their 
daughter’s choir practice. 


Every now and then go away and have a little relaxation. To remain 
constantly at work will diminish your judgment. Go some distance 
away, because work will be in perspective and a lack of harmony is 
more readily seen. 


—Leonardo da Vinci 


Whatever your lifestyle, you need a weekly regrouping 
ritual. You likely have something like this (or close to it) 
already. If so, leverage the habit by adding into it a higher- 
altitude review process. 


The people who find it hardest to make time for this 
review are those who have constantly on-demand work and 
home environments, with zero built-in time or space for 
regrouping. The most stressed professionals I have met are 
the ones who have to be mission-critically reactive at work 
(e.g., high-level equities traders and chiefs of staff) and 
then go home to a couple of under-ten-year-old children 
and a spouse who also had a hard day at work. Some of 
them fortunately have a one-hour train commute. 

If you recognize yourself in that picture, your greatest 
challenge will be to build in a consistent process of 
regrouping, with your world not directly in your face. You'll 
need to either accept the requirement of an after-hours 
time at your desk on a Friday night or establish a relaxed 
but at-work kind of location and time at home. 


Your best thoughts about work won’t happen while you’re at work. 


Executive Operational Review Time I’ve coached many 
executives to block out two hours on their calendars at the 
end of their workweek. For them the biggest problem is 
how to balance quality thinking and catch-up time with the 
urgent demands of mission-critical interactions. This is a 
tough call. The most senior and savvy of them, however, 
know the value of sacrificing the seemingly urgent for the 
truly important, and they create their islands of time for 
some version of this process. One of our clients, head of 
executive development for one of the largest companies in 
the world, suggested that building in quality time for review 
and regrouping in order to trust one’s intuitive decision 
making is both critical and sorely lacking in the higher 
echelons of his organization. 


Thinking is the very essence of, and the most difficult thing to do in, 
business and in life. Empire builders spend hour-after-hour on mental 
work... while others party. If you’re not consciously aware of putting 
forth the effort to exert self-guided integrated thinking .. . then you’re 
giving in to laziness and no longer control your life. 


—David Kekich 


Even the executives who have integrated a consistent 
reflective space for their work, though, often seem to give 
short shrift to the more mundane review and catch-up 
process at the Horizon 1 (Projects) level. Between wall-to- 
wall meetings and ambling around your koi pond with a 
glass of wine at sunset, there’s got to be a slightly elevated 
level of review required for operational control and focus. If 
you think you have all your open loops fully identified, 
clarified, assessed, and actionalized, you’re probably 
kidding yourself. 


The “Bigger Picture” Reviews 


Yes, at some point you must clarify the larger outcomes, the 
long-term goals, the visions and principles that ultimately 
drive, test, and prioritize your decisions. 

What are your key goals and objectives in your work? 
What should you have in place a year or three years from 
now? How is your career going? Is this the lifestyle that is 
most fulfilling to you? Are you doing what you really want or 
need to do, from a deeper and longer-term perspective? 


Trying to create goals before you have confidence that you can keep 
your everyday world under control will often undermine your 
motivation and energy rather than enhance them. 


The explicit focus of this book is not teasing out those 
Horizon 3-to-5 levels. Urging you to operate from a higher 
perspective is, however, its implicit purpose—to assist you 
in making your total life expression more fulfilling and 
better aligned with the bigger game you’re all about. As you 
increase the speed and agility with which you clear the 
Ground and Horizon 1 levels of your life and work, be sure 
to revisit the other levels you’re engaged in, as needed, to 
maintain a truly clear head. 

How often you ought to challenge yourself with that type 
of wide-ranging review is something only you can know. The 
principle I must affirm at this juncture is this: 

You need to assess your life and work at the appropriate 
horizons, making the appropriate decisions, at the 
appropriate intervals, in order to really come clean. That’s a 
lifelong invitation and obligation to yourself, to fulfill 
whatever your unfinished destiny or intentionality happens 
to be. 


In order to understand the world, one has to turn away from it on 
occasion. 


—Albert Camus 


Over the years I have discovered, through my own 
experience as well as being intimately involved with scores 
of people in their day-to-day worlds, that getting ultimately 
grounded and in control of the mundane aspects of life 
produces a rich field of natural inspiration about our 
higher-level stuff. It is because of our deeper drives and 
inclinations that we have embroiled ourselves in the 
complexities and commitments that often create confusion 
and the sense of being overwhelmed. You felt a profound 
need to have children; now you’ve got them, and each one 
is a major business to manage for at least two decades. 


You've felt impelled to be creative and produce recognized 
(and monetized) value in the world; so you’ve built a 
business or committed to a lofty professional career, and 
you’re now buried in many more things than you feel you 
can handle. More goals may not be necessary for you now— 
you need comfort with the ones you’ve already put in 
motion, and the confidence that you can execute elegantly 
on any new ones. 

We can always use a refreshed view of our visions, 
values, and objectives, indeed. But in my experience you'll 
resist that conversation with yourself if you don’t think 
you’re handling the world you’ve already created for 
yourself very well! How long does it take to change a goal 
or picture of what you want? Not much time, if any. How 
long will it take you to feel confident that you can deliver to 
yourself the outcomes you commit to? My experience is that 
it will be at least two years of implementing and habituating 
this methodology to get to that level of self-confidence. 
That’s not bad news—it’s just news. The good news is that 
getting more control at the more mundane and operational 
levels of your life and work is immediately available as you 
start to apply these best practices, and it will likely open up 
real aspects of your bigger game that you wouldn’t be able 
to recognize or leverage without it. 


The world itself is never overwhelmed or confused—only we are, due to 
how we are engaged with it. 


An additional aspect of this future-thinking dynamic is 
the value of staying immensely flexible and informal about 
goal setting. A significant change in this area has been 
pioneered in the software world, as “agile programming” 
has become the norm for successful start-ups. Have a 
vision, do your best to imagine what it might look like, get 


cranking on producing something as a viably marketable 
first iteration, and then “dynamically steer,” maturing both 
your vision as well as how to implement it, based on real 
feedback from your real world. The message is: positive 
future thinking is critical and fabulous, but it’s most 
effectively manifested when it is tied to a confidence of 
execution in the material world, with responsiveness and 
course correction built in. 

Which brings us to the ultimate point and challenge of all 
this personal capturing, clarifying, organizing, and 
reflecting methodology: It’s 9:22 a.m. Wednesday morning 
—what do you do? 


Engaging: Making the Best Action 
Choices 


Ultimately and always you must trust your intuition. There are many 
things you can do, however, that can enhance that trust. 


WHEN IT comes to your real-time, plow-through, get-it-done 
workday, how do you decide what to do at any given point? 
As I’ve said, my simple answer is, trust your heart. Or 
your spirit. Or, if you’re allergic to those kinds of words, try 

these: your gut, the seat of your pants, your liver, your 
intuition—whatever works for you as a reference point that 
has you step back and access whatever you consider the 
source of your inner wisdom. If you’ve ever made 
thoughtful versus knee-jerk and reactive choices, you'll 
know what I mean. 

That doesn’t mean you throw your life to the winds— 
unless, of course, it does. I actually went down that route 
myself with a vengeance at one point in my life, and I can 
attest that the lessons were valuable, if not necessarily 
necessary.— 

As outlined in chapter 2 (pages 52-57), I have found 
three priority frameworks to be enormously helpful in the 
context of deciding actions: 


e The four-criteria model for choosing actions in the 
moment 

e The threefold model for evaluating daily work 

e The six-level model for reviewing your own work 


These happen to be shown in reverse hierarchical order 
—that is, the reverse of the typical strategic top-down 
perspective. In keeping with the nature of the Getting 
Things Done methodology, I have found it useful to once 
again work from the bottom up, meaning I’ll start with the 
most mundane levels. 


The Four-Criteria Model for Choosing 
Actions in the Moment 


Remember that you make your action choices based on the 
following four criteria, in order: 


e Context 

e Time available 

e Energy available 
e Priority 


Let’s examine each of these in light of how you can best 
structure your systems and behaviors to take advantage of 
its dynamics. 


Context 


At any point in time, the first thing to consider is, what 
could you possibly do, where you are, with the tools you 
have? Do you have a phone? Do you have access to the 
person you need to talk with face-to-face about three 
agenda items? Are you at the store where you need to buy 


something? If you can’t do the action because you’re not in 
the appropriate location or don’t have the appropriate 
tools, don’t worry about it. 

As I’ve said, it’s often helpful to organize your action 
reminders by context—Calls, At Home, At Computer, 
Errands, Agenda for Joe, Agenda for Staff Meeting, and so 
on. Since context is the first criterion that comes into play 
in your best choice of actions, context-sorted lists prevent 
unnecessary reassessments about what to do. If you have a 
bunch of things to do on one to-do list, but you actually 
can’t do many of them in the same context, you force 
yourself to continually keep reconsidering al/ of them. 


You have freedom when you are easy in your harness. 


—Robert Frost 


If you have traveled to meet a client at her office and on 
arrival discover that the meeting will be delayed for fifteen 
minutes, you will want to refer to your Calls list for 
something you could do to use your time productively. Your 
action lists should fold in or out, based on what you could 
possibly do at any time. 

A second real benefit accrues from organizing action 
reminders by appropriate context: in itself that forces you 
to make the all-important determination about the next 
physical action on your stuff. All of my action lists are set up 
this way, so I have to decide on the very next physical action 
before I can know which list to put an item on. (Is this 
something that requires the computer? A phone? Being in a 
store? Talking in real time with my wife?) People who give 
themselves a Miscellaneous action list (i.e. one not specific 
in context) often let themselves slide in the next-action 
decision, too. 


I frequently encourage people I’m working with to 
structure their list categories early on as they’re processing 
their in-trays, because that automatically grounds their 
projects in the real things that need to get done to get them 
moving. 


Creative Context Sorting 


As you begin to implement this methodology consistently, 
you will invariably find inventive ways to tailor your own 
contextual categories to fit your situation. Though sorting 
by the tool or physical location required is most common, 
there are often other uniquely useful ways to filter your 
reminders. 

Before I go on a long trip, I will create “Before Trip” asa 
temporary category into which I will move everything from 
any of my action lists that must be handled before I leave. 
That becomes the only list I need to review, until they’re all 
done. At times I have had many next actions that required 
me to be in “creative writing” mode; though those actions 
were At Computer, they required a different time and frame 
of mind than the rest of the things I needed to do at my 
laptop. It was much more relaxing and productive to 
manage my focus by sorting those onto a different, Creative 
Writing action list. I currently divide my computer-required 
actions into those that don’t require an Internet connection, 
those that do, and those that are just surfing (potentially 
fun or interesting things on the Web to explore). 

Over the years I have seen people effectively use 
categories such as “Brain Gone” (for simple actions 
requiring no mental horsepower) and “Less Than 5-Minute” 
(for getting quick “wins”). At times people feel more 
comfortable sorting their reminders by the areas of focus in 
their life and work—“Financial,” “Family,” “Administrative,” 
etc. Recently someone shared with me the value she found 


in categorizing actions based upon the immediate 
emotional reward for doing them—service to others, life 
stability, abundance building, etc. There is no “right” way to 
structure your Next Actions lists—only what works best for 
you, and that part of your system will likely change as your 
life does.~ 

If you are a novice to this process, these details and 
distinctions may seem unnecessary or overwhelming. Just 
keep in mind that when you actually identify all the next 
actions you are committed to taking to fulfill your 
commitments in life and work, you will likely have many 
more than a hundred. To truly implement an effective 
“external brain” and garner its amazing results, managing 
this ground-floor level of your work with this degree of 
sophistication will pay off immeasurably. 


Time Available 


The second factor in choosing an action is how much time 
you have before you have to do something else. If your 
meeting is starting in ten minutes, you'll most likely select a 
different action to do right now than you would if the next 
couple of hours were clear. 

Obviously, it’s good to know how much time you have at 
hand (hence the value of accessible calendar and 
timepiece). A total-life action-reminder inventory will give 
you maximum information about what you need to do, and 
make it much easier to match your actions to the windows 
you have. In other words, if you have ten minutes before 
that next meeting, find a ten-minute thing to do. If your lists 
have only the big or important things on them, no item 
listed may be possible to handle in a ten-minute period— 
especially if they are missing next-action reminders. If 
you’re going to have to do those shorter action things 


anyway, the most productive way to get them done is to 
utilize the little “weird time” windows that occur 
throughout the day. 

Additionally there are many times when you have been 
head down in some mentally intensive endeavor for a 
couple of hours, and you’d like to shift your focus and get 
some easy wins. Then it’s great to “snack” on your action 
lists for some simple things to complete easily and quickly. 
Change a restaurant reservation, call a friend and wish him 
or her happy birthday, order birdseed, or just walk next 
door to the market or pharmacy for something on your 
Errands list. 


Energy Available 


We all have times when we think more effectively, and times when we 
should not be thinking at all. 


—Daniel Cohen 


Although you can increase your energy level at times by 
changing your context and redirecting your focus, you can 
do only so much. The tail end of a day taken up bya 
marathon budget-planning session is probably not the best 
time to call a prospective client, start drafting a 
performance-review policy, or broach a new and sensitive 
topic with your life partner. It might be better to call an 
airline to change a reservation, process some expense 
receipts, step out on your patio and watch the sunset, skim 
a trade journal, or just clean up a desk drawer. 

Just as having all your next-action options available 
allows you to take advantage of various time slots, knowing 
about everything you’re going to need to process and do at 


some point will allow you to match productive activity with 
your vitality level. 

I recommend that you always keep an inventory of things 
that need to be done that require very little mental or 
creative horsepower. When you’re in one of those low- 
energy states, do those things. Casual reading (magazines, 
articles, catalogs, Web surfing), contact data that needs to 
be inputted, file purging, backing up your computer, even 
just watering your plants and filling your stapler—these are 
some of the myriad things that you need or want to deal 
with sometime anyway. 


There is no reason not to be highly productive, even when you’re not 
in top form. 


This is one of the best reasons for having very clean 
edges to your personal management system: it makes it 
easy to continue doing productive activity when you’re not 
in top form. If you’re in a low-energy mode and your 
reading material is disorganized, your receipts are all over 
the place, your filing system is chaotic, and your in-tray is 
dysfunctional, it just seems like too much work to find and 
organize the tasks at hand, so you simply avoid doing 
anything at all and then you feel even worse. One of the 
best ways to increase your energy is to close some of your 
loops. So always be sure to have some easy loops to close, 
right at hand.* 

These first three criteria for choosing action (context, 
time, and energy) bespeak the need for a complete next- 
action reminder system. Much of the time you won’t be ina 
mode to do that kind of coordinated and organized 
thinking; it needs to have already been done. If it is, you can 
operate much more “in your zone” and choose from 
delineated actions that fit the situation. 


Priority 


It is impossible to feel good about your choices unless you are clear 
about what your work really is. 


Given the context you’re in and the time and energy you 
have, the obvious next criterion for action choice is relative 
priority: “Out of all my remaining options, what is the most 
important thing for me to do?” 

“How do I decide my priorities?” is a question I 
frequently hear from people. It springs from their 
experience of having more on their plate to do than they 
can comfortably handle. They know that some hard choices 
have to be made, and that some things may not get done at 
all. 

At the end of the day, in order to feel good about what 
you didn’t get done, you must have made some conscious 
decisions about your accountabilities, goals, and values. 
That process invariably includes an often-complex interplay 
with the goals, values, and directions of the organization(s) 
and significant people in your life, and with the importance 
of those relationships to you. This criterion is addressed by 
utilizing the six-horizon commitment model I’ve described 
and will elaborate on shortly. 


The Threefold Model for Evaluating Daily 
Work 


Setting priorities assumes that some things will be more 
important than others, but important relative to what? In 
this context, the answer is, to your work—that is, the job(s) 
you have accepted from yourself and/or from others. This is 
where the next two frameworks need to be brought to bear 
in your thinking. They’re about defining your work. Keep in 


mind that though much of this methodology will be within 
the arena of your professional focus, I’m using “work” in the 
universal sense, to mean anything you have a commitment 
to make happen, personally as well as professionally. 

These days, daily work activity itself presents a relatively 
new type of challenge to most professionals, something that 
it’s helpful to understand as we endeavor to build the most 
productive systems. As I explained earlier, during the 
course of the workday, at any point in time, you'll be 
engaged in one of three types of activities: 


e Doing predefined work 
e Doing work as it shows up 
e Defining your work 


You may be doing things on your action lists, doing things 
as they come up, or processing incoming inputs to 
determine what work needs to be done with them, then or 
later, from your lists. 

This is common sense. But many people let themselves 
get sucked into the second activity—dealing with unplanned 
and unexpected things that show up—much too easily, and 
let the other two slide, to their detriment. 


It is often easier to get wrapped up in the urgent demands of the 
moment than to deal with your in-tray, e-mail, and the rest of your 
open loops. 


Let’s say it’s 10:26 a.m. Monday, and you’re in your 
office. You’ve just ended a half-hour unexpected phone call 
with a prospective client. You have three pages of scribbled 
notes from the conversation. There’s a meeting scheduled 
with your staff at eleven, about half an hour from now. You 
were out late last night with your spouse’s parents and are 
still a little frayed around the edges (you told your father-in- 


law you’d get back to him about... what?). Your assistant 
just put two arriving international express packages on 
your desk, and additionally says he needs to talk with you 
about three urgent meeting requests he doesn’t know how 
you want handled. You have a major strategic-planning 
session coming up in two days, for which you have yet to 
formulate your ideas. The oil indicator light in your car 
came on as you drove to work this morning. And your boss 
hinted as you passed her earlier in the hall that she’d like 
your thoughts on the e-mail she sent you last night, before 
this afternoon’s three o’clock meeting. 

Are your systems set up to maximally support dealing 
with this reality, at 10:26 on Monday morning? If you’re still 
keeping things in your head, and if you’re still trying to 
capture only the “critical” stuff in your lists, I suggest that 
the answer is no. 

I’ve noticed that people are actually more comfortable 
dealing with surprises and crises than they are taking 
control of processing, organizing, reviewing, and assessing 
that part of their work that is not as self-evident. It’s easy to 
get seduced into “busy” and “urgent” mode, especially 
when you have a lot of unprocessed and relatively out-of 
control work on your desk, in your e-mail, and on your 
mind. 


Success is learning to deal with Plan B. 


—Unknown 


In fact, much of our life and work does just show up in 
the moment, and it often becomes the priority when it does. 
It’s indeed true for most professionals (and parents of 
young children!) that the nature of their job requires them 
to be instantly available to handle new work as it appears in 
many forms. For instance, you need to pay attention to your 


boss when he shows up and wants a few minutes of your 
time. You get a request from a senior executive that 
suddenly takes precedence over anything else you thought 
you needed to do today. You find out about a serious 
problem fulfilling a major customer’s order, and you have to 
take care of it right away. Or your baby develops a serious 
cough. 

These are all understandable judgment calls. But the 
angst begins to mount when the other actions on your lists 
are not reviewed and renegotiated by you or between you 
and everyone else. The constant sacrifices of not doing the 
work you have defined on your lists can be tolerated only if 
you know what you’re not doing. That requires regular 
processing of your in-tray (defining your work) and 
consistent review of complete lists of all your 
predetermined work. 


There are no interruptions—there are only mismanaged inputs. 


If choosing to do work that just showed up instead of 
doing work you predefined is a conscious choice based on 
your best call, that’s playing the game the most effective 
way you can. Most people, however, have major 
improvements to make in how they clarify, manage, and 
renegotiate their total inventory of projects and actions. If 
you let yourself get caught up in the urgency of the 
moment, without feeling comfortable about what you’re not 
dealing with, the result is frustration and anxiety. Too often 
the stress and reduced effectiveness are blamed on the 
surprises. If you know what you’re doing and what you’re 
not doing, surprises are just another opportunity to be 
flexible and creative, and to excel. 

Another reason people consider unexpected demands or 
requests negative is because they don’t trust their own 


system and behaviors to be able to put a “bookmark” on any 
resulting action that needs to be taken, or on the work 
they’re doing at the moment. They know they need do 
something about the new work that just showed up, but 
they don’t trust that a simple note in their own in-tray will 
ensure it is handled with proper timing. So they stop their 
previous work and immediately go do what was just 
requested or required of them, complaining about the 
interruption that just disturbed their life. There are no 
interruptions, really—there are simply mismanaged 
occurrences. 

In addition, when the in-tray and the action lists get 
ignored for too long, random things lying in them tend to 
surface as emergencies later on, adding more unexpected 
work-as-it-shows-up to fuel the fire. 

Many people use the inevitability of an almost infinite 
stream of immediately evident things to do as a way to 
avoid the responsibilities of defining their work and 
managing their total inventory. It’s easy to get lured into 
not-quite-so-critical stuff that is right at hand, especially if 
your in-tray and your personal organization are out of 
control. Too often “managing by wandering around” is an 
excuse for getting away from amorphous piles of stuff. 

This is where the need for the Getting Things Done 
methodology really shows up. Most people did not grow up 
in a world where defining the edges of work and managing 
huge numbers of open loops were required. But when 
you’ve developed the skill and habits of processing input 
rapidly into a rigorously defined system, it becomes much 
easier to trust your judgment calls about the dance of what 
to do, what to stop doing, and what to do instead. 


The Moment-To-Moment Balancing Act 


At a master level, you can shift like lightning from one foot 
to the other and back again. While you’re processing your 
in-tray, for example, your assistant enters to tell you about a 
situation that needs immediate attention. No sweat—your 
in-tray and e-mail are still there, with everything still to be 
processed in a coordinated view, ready to be picked up 
again when you can get back to it. While you’re on hold on 
the phone, you can be reviewing your action lists and 
getting a sense of what you’re going to do when the call is 
done. When your infant is crawling around in the living 
room and you’re highly attuned to anything unusual you 
might have to respond to, you can be handling simple Web- 
surfing research on your At Computer list. While you wait 
for a meeting to start, you can work down the Read/Review 
stack you’ve brought with you. And when the conversation 
you weren’t expecting with your boss shrinks the time you 
have before your next meeting to twelve minutes, you can 
easily find a way to use that window to good advantage. 


To ignore the unexpected (even if it were possible) would be to live 
without opportunity, spontaneity, and the rich moments of which “life” 
is made. 


—Stephen Covey 


You can only do one of these work activities at a time. If 
you stop to talk to someone in his or her office, you’re not 
working off your lists or processing incoming stuff. The 
challenge is to feel confident about what you have decided 
to do. 

So how do you decide? This again will involve your 
intuitive judgments—how important is the unexpected 
work, against all the rest? How long can you let your in-tray 
go unprocessed and all your stuff unreviewed and trust that 
you’re making good decisions about what to do? 


Do unexpected work as it shows up, not because it is the path of least 
resistance, but because it is the thing you need to do vis-a-vis all the 
rest. 


People often complain about the interruptions that 
prevent them from doing their work. But interruptions are 
unavoidable in life. When you become elegant at 
dispatching what’s coming in and are organized enough to 
take advantage of “weird time” windows that show up, you 
can switch between one task and the other rapidly. You can 
be processing e-mails while you’re on hold on a conference 
call. Research has now proven that you can’t actually 
multitask, i.e. put conscious focused attention on more than 
one thing at a time; and if you are trying to, it denigrates 
your performance considerably. If your head is your only 
system for placeholding, you will experience an attempted 
multitasking internally, which is psychologically impossible 
and the source of much stress for many people. If you have 
established practices for parking still-incomplete items 
midstream, however, your focus can shift cleanly from one 
to the next and back again, with the precision of a martial 
artist who appears to fight four people at once, but who in 
reality is simply rapidly shifting attention. 

Nonetheless, even if you are a “black belt” in capturing 
and bookmarking what’s going on, you must still learn to 
make quick and appropriate choices among those many 
tasks to keep a healthy balance of your workflow. Your 
choices will still have to be calibrated against your own 
clarity about the nature and goals of your work. 

Your ability to deal with surprise is your competitive 
edge, and a key to sanity and sustainability in your lifestyle. 
But at a certain point, if you’re not catching up and getting 
things under control, staying busy with only the work at 
hand will undermine your effectiveness. And ultimately, in 
order to know whether you should stop what you’re doing 


and do something else, you’ll need to have a good sense of 
all your roles and how they fit together in a larger context. 
The only way you can have that is to evaluate your life and 
work appropriately at multiple horizons. 


The Six-Level Model for Reviewing Your 
Own Work 


The six levels of work as we saw in chapter 2 (pages 54-56) 
may be thought of in terms of altitude, as in the floors ofa 
building: 


¢« Horizon 5: Life 

¢ Horizon 4: Long-term visions 

e Horizon 3: One- to two-year goals 

e Horizon 2: Areas of focus and accountability 
e Horizon 1: Current projects 

e Ground: Current actions 


It makes sense that each of these levels should enhance 
and align with the ones above it. In other words, your 
priorities will sit in a hierarchy from the top down. 
Ultimately, if the phone call you’re supposed to make 
clashes with your life purpose or values, to be in sync with 
yourself you won’t make it. If your job structure doesn’t 
match up with where you need to be a year from now, you 
should rethink how you’ve framed your areas of focus and 
roles, if you want to get where you’re going most efficiently. 

Let’s look at that first example from the bottom up. The 
phone call you need to make (action) is about the deal 
you’re working on (project), which would increase sales 
(accountability). This particular deal would give you the 
opportunity to move up in the sales force (job goal) because 
of the new market your company wants to penetrate 
(organization vision). And that would get you closer to the 


way you want to be living, both financially and 
professionally (life). 


Your work is to discover your work and then with all your heart to give 
yourself to it. 


—Buddha 


Or, from the other direction, you’ve decided that you 
want to be your own boss and unlock some of your unique 
assets and talents in a particular area that resonates with 
you (life). So you create a business for yourself (vision), with 
some short-term key operational objectives (job goal). That 
gives you some critical roles you need to fulfill to get it 
rolling (accountability), with some immediate outcomes to 
achieve (projects). On each of those projects you'll have 
things you need to do, as soon as you can do them (next 
actions). 

The healthiest approach for relaxed control and inspired 
productivity is to manage all the levels in a balanced 
fashion. At any of those levels, it’s critical to identify all the 
open loops, all the incompletions, and all the commitments 
that you have right now, as best you can. They all came, 
consciously or not, from the urges, pulls, and pushes from 
these multiple levels within you. Without an acceptance and 
an objective assessment of what’s true in the present, and 
feeling confident you can manage what you’ve created, it’s 
always difficult to cast off for new shores. What’s in your e- 
mail? What are the projects you need to start or complete 
with your kids? What do you need to handle in your current 
roles at the office? What’s pushing you to change or 
attracting you to create in the next months or years? These 
are all open loops in your head, though often it takes 
deeper and more introspective processes to identify the 
bigger goals and subtler inclinations. 


The best place to succeed is where you are with what you have. 


—Charles Schwab 


There is magic in being in the present in your life. I’m 
always amazed at the power of clear observation simply 
about what’s going on, what’s true. Finding out the exact 
details of your personal finances, clarifying the historical 
data about the company you’re buying, or getting the facts 
about who really said what to whom in an interpersonal 
conflict can be constructive, if not absolutely necessary and 
downright healing. 

Getting things done, and feeling good about it, means 
being willing to recognize, acknowledge, and appropriately 
engage with all the things within the ecosystem of your 
consciousness. Mastering the art of stress-free productivity 
requires it. 


Working from the Bottom Up 


You're never lacking in opportunities to clarify your priorities at any 
level. Pay attention to which horizon is calling you. 


In order to create productive alignment in your life, you 
could quite reasonably start with a clarification from the top 
down. Decide why you’re on the planet. Figure out what 
kind of life and work and lifestyle would best allow you to 
fulfill that contract. What kind of job and personal 
relationships would support that direction? What key things 
would you need to put in place and make happen right now, 
and what could you do physically as soon as possible to kick- 
start each of those? 


In truth, you can approach your priorities from any level, 
at any time. I always have something that I could do 
constructively to enhance my awareness and focus on each 
level. I’m never lacking in more visions to elaborate, goals 
to reassess, projects to identify or create, or actions to 
decide on. The trick is to learn to pay attention to the ones 
you need to, at the appropriate time, to keep you clear and 
present with whatever you’re doing. 


Trying to manage from the top down when the bottom is out of control 
may be the /east effective approach. 


Because everything will ultimately be driven by the 
priorities of the level above it, any formulation of your 
priorities would obviously most efficiently begin at the top. 
For example, if you spend time prioritizing your work and 
then later discover that it’s not the work you think you 
ought to be doing, you may have wasted time and energy 
that could have been better spent defining the next job you 
really want. The problem is that without a sense of control 
at the implementation level (current projects and actions), 
and without trust in your own ability to manage those levels 
appropriately, trying to manage yourself from the top down 
often creates frustration. 

From a practical perspective, I suggest going from the 
bottom up instead. I’ve coached people from both 
directions, and in terms of lasting value, I can honestly say 
that getting someone in control of the details of his or her 
current physical world, and then elevating the focus from 
there, has never missed. 


Handle what has your attention and you'll then discover what really 
has your attention. 


The primary reason to work from this bottom-up 
direction is that it clears your inner decks to begin with, 
allowing your creative attention to focus on the more 
meaningful and elusive visions that you may need to 
challenge yourself to identify. Also, this particular method 
has a high degree of flexibility and freedom, and it includes 
a thinking and organizing practice that is universal and 
effective no matter what it’s focused on. That makes it 
worth learning, no matter what the actual content you’re 
dealing with at the moment may be. Change your mind and 
this process will help you adjust with maximum speed. It 
takes no time to reset a vision or goal, but learning to 
objectify and execute on it in a streamlined, coordinated, 
and stress-free way is an art that must be learned and 
practiced. Knowing you have that ability will give you 
permission to play a bigger game. It’s truly empowering. 

I have learned over the years that the most important 
thing to deal with is whatever is most on your mind. The 
fact that you think it shouldn’t be on your mind is irrelevant. 
It’s there, and it’s there for a reason. “Buy cat food” may 
certainly not rank high on some theoretical prioritizing 
inventory, but if that’s what’s pulling on you the most, in the 
moment, then handling it in some way would be Job One. 
Once you handle what has your attention, it frees you up to 
notice what really has your attention. Which, when you 
handle that, will allow you to see what really has your 
attention, and so on. Almost without exception the 
executives I have worked with are most plagued by the 
management of the nitty-gritty of their workaday world—e- 
mails, meetings, travel, projects going off the rails, etc. 
When they begin to get all that under control, their 
attention invariably turns to areas of focus and interest 
from a higher perspective—family, career, and quality-of-life 
stuff. So don’t worry about what horizon or what content of 
your life is the highest priority to deal with—deal with 
what’s present. When you do, you will more effectively 


uncover and address what’s really true and meaningful for 
* 
you.— 

While Horizon 5 (purpose and principles) is obviously the 
most important context within which to set priorities, 
experience has shown me that when we understand and 
implement al/ the levels of work in which we are engaged, 
especially the Ground and Horizon 1 levels, we gain greater 
freedom and resources to do the bigger work that we're all 
about. If your boat is sinking, you really don’t care in which 
direction it’s pointed! Although a bottom-up approach is not 
a conceptual priority, from a practical perspective it’s a 
critical factor in achieving a balanced, productive, and 
comfortable life. 


Ground The first thing to do is make sure your action lists 
are complete, which in itself can be quite a task. Those who 
focus on gathering and objectifying all of those items 
discover that there are many (often of some importance) 
they’ve forgotten, misplaced, or just not recognized. 

Aside from your calendar, if you don’t have at least fifty 
next actions and waiting-fors, including all the agendas for 
people and meetings, I would be skeptical about whether 
you really had all of them. If you’ve followed through 
rigorously with the steps and suggestions in part 2, though, 
you may have them already. If not, and you do want to get 
this level up-to-date, set aside some time to work through 
chapters 4 through 6 in real implementation mode. 

When you’ve finished getting this level of control current, 
you'll automatically have a more grounded sense of 
immediate priorities, which is almost impossible to achieve 
otherwise. 


Horizon 1 Finalize your Projects list. Does it truly capture 
all the commitments you have that will require more than 
one action to get done? That will define the boundaries of 


the kind of week-to- week operational world you’re in and 
allow you to relax your thinking for longer intervals. 

If you make a complete list of all of the things you want to 
have happen in your life and work at this level, you'll 
discover that there are actions you need to do that you 
didn’t realize. Just creating this objective inventory will give 
you a firmer basis on which to make decisions about what to 
do when you have discretionary time. Invariably when 
people get their Projects list up-to-date, they discover there 
are several things that could be done readily to move things 
they care about forward. 


Taking the inventory of your current work at all levels will automatically 
produce greater focus, alignment, and sense of priorities. 


Very few people have this clear data defined and 
available to themselves in some objective form. Before any 
discussion about what should be done this afternoon can 
take place, this information must be at hand. 

Again, if you’ve been putting into practice the 
methodology of Getting Things Done, your Projects list will 
be where it needs to be. For most of the people we coach, it 
takes ten to fifteen hours of capturing, clarifying, and 
organizing to get to the point of trusting the thoroughness 
of their inventory. 

And to achieve the most pristine level of “mind like 
water” (nothing on your mind except what’s present in the 
moment), Horizon 1 is the level that seems to incorporate 
some of the most interesting challenges. For all of us, there 
are situations and circumstances that emerge that bother, 
interest, or distract us, but with which it is not immediately 
obvious or evident how to engage. Your son has a problem 
with his math teacher; you are frustrated with how long it 
takes to implement a procedure in your company; you have 


a concern about the person running your fund-raising 
committee; you keep thinking you ought to be rekindling 
your interest in painting; etc. Quieting that subtle noise 
requires identifying objective outcomes for each of those (a 
project), with accompanying next actions placed into your 
trusted system. Playing consistently at this level of the 
stress-free productivity game is a hallmark of its mastery. 


Horizon 2 This is the level of “current job responsibilities” 
and “areas of my life to maintain at an appropriate 
standard.” What are the hats you wear, the roles you play? 
Professionally, this would relate to your current position and 
work. Personally, it would include the areas of responsibility 
you’ve taken on in your family, in your community, and of 
course with yourself as a functioning person. 


If you’re not totally sure what your job is, it will always feel 
overwhelming. 


You may have some of these roles already defined and 
written out. If you’ve recently taken a new position and 
there’s an agreement or contract about your areas of 
accountability, that would certainly be a good start. If 
you’ve done any kind of personal goal-setting and values- 
clarifying exercises in the past and still have any materials 
you created then, add those to the mix. 

Next I recommend that you make and keep a list called 
“Areas of Focus.” You might like to separate this into 
“Professional” and “Personal” sublists, in which case you'll 
want to use them both equally for a consistent review. This 
is one of the most useful checklists you can create for your 
own self-management. It won’t require the kind of once-a- 
week recalibration that the Projects list will; more likely it 
will have meaning on a longer recursion cycle. Depending 


on the speed of change in some of the more important 
areas of your life and work, this should be used as a trigger 
for potential new projects every one to three months. 

You probably have somewhere between four and seven 
key areas of responsibility in your work, and a similar 
number personally. Your job may include things like staff 
development, systems design, long-range planning, 
administrative support, customer service, and marketing; 
or accountabilities for facilities, fulfillment, quality control, 
asset management, and so on. If you’re your own business, 
your attention will be on many more areas than if you have 
a very specialized function in a large organization. The rest 
of your life might entail areas of focus such as parenting, 
partnering, spiritual community, health, volunteering, home 
management, personal finances, self-development, creative 
expression, and so forth. And each one of those specific 
areas could be broken down into useful subcategories. 
“Parenting” could generate separate checklists for each of 
your children. “Marketing” can include “Program Design,” 
“Research,” “Social Media,” etc. 

The operational purpose of the Areas of Focus list is to 
ensure that you have all your projects and next actions 
defined, so you can manage your responsibilities 
appropriately. If you were to create an accounting of those 
and evaluate them objectively, in terms of what you’re doing 
and should be doing, you’ll undoubtedly uncover projects 
you need to add to your Projects list. You may, in reviewing 
the list, decide that some areas are just fine and are being 
taken care of. Then again, you may realize that something 
has been bugging or intriguing you in one area and that a 
project should be created to deal with it. “Areas of Focus” is 
really just a more abstract and refined version of the 
Triggers list we covered earlier. 

Every person I have worked with in the past thirty years 
has uncovered at least two or three important gaps at this 
level of discussion. For instance, a common role a manager 


or executive has is “staff.” Upon reflection, most realize 
they need to add a project or two in that area, such as 
“Upgrade support office procedures,” “Research hiring a 
chief of staff,” or “Upgrade performance review processes.” 
Or when objectifying the accountabilities for aspects of 
one’s personal life, often projects like “Research yoga 
classes” and “Set up summer activities for the kids” show 
up. 

A discussion of priorities would have to incorporate all of 
these levels of current agreements between you and others. 
If you get this professional “job description” checklist in 
play and keep it current, you’ll probably be more relaxed 
and in control than most people in our culture. Few people 
are doing only what they were hired to do, and keeping 
clear about new and changing expectations needs to be a 
constantly updated conversation. Equally few people 
maintain a consistent and objective overview of all the 
relevant areas of their balanced life—family, fun, or finances 
—with a mind to execute on the gaps. Driving your thinking 
and systems from these levels will go a long way toward 
moving you from hope to trust as you make the necessary 
on-the-run choices about what to do. 


When you’re not sure where you’re going or what’s really important to 
you, you'll never Know when enough is enough. 


Horizons 3-5 Whereas the three lower levels have mostly to 
do with the current state of things—your actions, projects, 
and areas of responsibility—from Horizon 3 up the factors 
of the future and your direction and intentions are primary. 
There is still an inventory to take at these plateaus 
(especially at the top level, purpose and principles, which 
represents an ongoing criterion for monitoring and 
correcting activities and behaviors), but it’s more about 


“What is true right now about where I’ve decided I’m going 
and how I’m going to get there?” This can range from one- 
year goals in your job (Horizon 3) to a three-year vision for 
your career and personal net worth (Horizon 4) to intuiting 
your life purpose and how to maximize its expression 
(Horizon 5). 

I’m blending the three uppermost levels together here 
because situations often can’t easily be pigeonholed into 
one or another of these categories. Also, since Getting 
Things Done is more about the art of implementation and 
execution than about how to define goals and vision, I won’t 
offer a rigorous examination here. But by its very nature 
this investigation can broach potentially deep and complex 
arenas, which could include business strategy, organization 
development, career planning, and life direction and values. 


Pick battles big enough to matter, small enough to win. 


—Jonathan Kozol 


For our purposes, the focus is on capturing what 
motivators exist for you in current reality that determine 
the inventory of what your work actually is, right now (some 
of which may be stemming from your higher-level 
commitments and intentions). Whether your directions and 
goals should be changed or clarified—based on deeper 
thinking, analysis, and intuition—could be another 
discussion. Even so, there are probably some things you can 
identify right now that can help you get current in your own 
thinking about your work and what’s important in it. 

If you were to intuitively frame a picture of what you 
think you might be doing twelve to eighteen months from 
now, or what the nature of your job will look like at that 
point, what would that trigger? At this level, which is 
subtler, there may be things personally you need to let go 


of, and people and systems that may need to be developed 
to allow the transition. And as the job itself is a moving 
target, given the shifting sands of the professional world 
these days, there may need to be projects defined to ensure 
viability of the outputs in your area. 

In the personal arena, this is where you would want to 
consider things like: “My career is going to stagnate unless 
I assert my own goals more specifically to my boss [or my 
boss’s boss].” Or “What new things are my children going to 
be doing in the next couple of years, and what do I need to 
do differently because of that?” Or “What preparation do I 
need to ensure that I can deal with this health problem 
we’ve just uncovered?” 

Through a longer scope you might assess: How is your 
career going? How is your personal life moving along? 
What is your organization doing relative to changes in the 
environment, and what impact does that have on you? 
These are the one-to-five-year-horizon questions that, when 
I ask them, elicit different and important kinds of answers 
from everyone. 

I coached someone in a large international bank who, 
after a few months of implementing this methodology and 
getting control of his day-to-day inventory of work, decided 
the time was right to invest in his own start-up high-tech 
firm. The thought had been too intimidating for him to 
address initially, but working from the Ground level up 
made it much more accessible and a natural consequence 
of thinking at this horizon. I recently heard of his 
phenomenal success in the new endeavor. 

If you’re involved in anything that has a future of longer 
than a year (marriage, kids, career, a company, an art form, 
a lifelong passion), you would do well to think about what 
you might need to be doing to manage things along that 
vector. 

Questions to ask are: 


e What are the longer-term goals and objectives in my 
organization, and what projects do I need to have in 
place related to them to fulfill my responsibilities? 

e What longer-term goals and objectives have I set for 
myself, and what projects do I need to have in place to 
make them happen? 

e What other significant things are happening that could 
affect my options about what I’m doing? 


Let me emphasize here that setting new goals or raising 
your standards is not what I’m specifically advocating. I am, 
rather, directing your focus to what may be inherently true 
about these situations within your current reality. If they 
are there in any obvious or subtle way, then addressing 
them appropriately will be critical to getting into your own 
clear space. 

Here are some examples of the kinds of issues that show 
up at this level of conversation: 


The changing nature of your job, given the shifting 
priorities of the company. Instead of managing 
the production of your own training programs in- 
house, you’re going to outsource them to vendors. 

The direction in which you feel you need to move in 
your career. You see yourself doing a different 
kind of job a year from now, and you need to make 
a transition out of the one you have while 
exploring the options for a transfer or promotion. 

The organization’s direction, given globalization 
and expansion. You see a lot of major 
international travel looming on the horizon for 
you, and given your lifestyle preferences, you 
need to consider how to readjust your career 
plans. 

Lifestyle preferences and changing needs. As your 
kids get older, your need to be at home with them 


is diminishing, and your interest in investment 
and retirement planning is growing. 


At the topmost level of thinking you’ll need to ask some of 
the ultimate questions: Why does your company exist? Why 
do you exist? What is the core DNA of your existence, 
personally and/or organizationally, that drives your choices? 
This is the big-picture stuff with which hundreds of books 
and gurus and models are devoted to helping you grapple. 

Why? This is the great question with which we all 
struggle. 

You can have all the other levels of your life and work 
shipshape, defined, and organized to a T. Still, if you’re the 
slightest bit off course in terms of what at the deepest level 
you want or are called to be doing, you’re going to be 
uncomfortable. 


Getting Priority Thinking off Your Mind 


Take at least a few minutes, if you haven’t already done so, 
to jot down some informal notes about things that occurred 
to you while you were reading this chapter. Whatever 
popped into your mind at these more elevated levels of your 
inner radar, write it down and get it out of your head. 


Neutral is a state where you are not jumping ahead too quickly or 
moving too slow. Neutral does not mean being inactive, complacent, or 
passive. It’s about a calm poise that allows for new information and 
new possibilities to emerge before taking further action. When in 
neutral you actually increase your sensitivity and intuitive intelligence. 
Neutral is fertile ground for new possibilities to grow from. 


—Doc Childre 


Then process those notes. Decide whether what you 
wrote down is something you really want to move on or not. 
If not, throw the note away, or put it on a Someday/Maybe 
list or in a folder called “Dreams and Goals I Might Get 
Around to at Some Point.” Perhaps you want to continue 
accumulating more of this kind of future thinking and would 
like to do the exercise with more formality—for example, by 
drafting a new business plan with your partners, designing 
and writing out your idea of a dream life with your spouse, 
creating a more specific career map for the next three 
years for yourself, or just getting a personal coach who can 
lead you through those discussions and thought processes. 
If so, put that outcome on your Projects list, and decide the 
next action. Then do it, hand it off to get done, or put the 
action reminder on the appropriate list. 

With that done, you may want to turn your focus to 
developmental thinking about specific projects that have 
been identified but not fleshed out as fully as you'd like. 
You'll want to ensure that you’re set up for that kind of 
vertical processing. 


Getting Projects Under Control 


CHAPTERS 4 THROUGH 9 have given you all the tricks and methods 
you need to clear your head and make intuitive choices 
about what to do when. That’s the horizontal level—what 
needs your attention and action across the horizontal 
landscape of your life. The last piece of the puzzle is the 
vertical level—the digging deep and pie-in-the-sky thinking 
that can leverage your creative brainpower. You may indeed 
have clarified outcomes and next-action steps for the 
various projects and situations in which you’re involved, but 
there are times when you will feel called to enhance your 
relationship with some of them with more creative thinking 
and detailed how-to development. 

That gets us back to refining and energizing our project 
planning. 


The Need for More Informal Planning 


The middle of every successful project looks like a disaster. 


—Rosabeth Moss Kanter 


After years of working with thousands of professionals down 
in the trenches, I can safely say that virtually all of us could 


be doing more planning, more informally and more often, of 
our projects and our lives. And if we did, it would relieve a 
lot of pressure on our psyches and produce an enormous 
amount of creative output with minimal effort. 

I’ve discovered that the biggest improvement 
opportunity in planning does not consist of techniques for 
the highly elaborate and complex kinds of project 
organizing that professional project managers sometimes 
use (like Gantt charts). Most of the people who need those 
already have them, or at least have access to the training 
and software required to learn about them. The real need is 
to capture and utilize more of the creative, proactive 
thinking we do—or could do. 


You need to set up systems and tricks that get you to think about your 
projects and situations more frequently, more easily, and more in 
depth. 


The major reason for the lack of this kind of effective 
value-added thinking is the dearth of easily structured and 
usable systems for managing the potentially infinite amount 
of detail that could show up as a result. That is why my 
approach tends to be bottom-up. If you feel out of control 
with your current actionable commitments, you'll resist 
focused planning; an unconscious pushback occurs. As you 
begin to apply these methods, however, you may find that 
they free up room for enormous creative and constructive 
thinking. If you have systems and habits ready to leverage 
your ideas, your productivity can expand exponentially. 

In chapter 3, I covered in some detail the five phases of 
project planning that take something from the idea stage 
into physical reality. 

What follows is a compilation of practical tips and 
techniques to facilitate the natural, informal planning 
processes I recommend. Although these suggestions are all 


based on common sense, they’re not followed by most 
people nearly as frequently as they could be. Put them to 
use whenever and as often as you can, instead of saving up 
your thinking for big formal meetings. 


What Projects Should You Be Planning? 


Most of the outcomes you have identified for your Projects 
list will not need any kind of front-end planning, other than 
the sort you do in your head, quickly and naturally, to come 
up with a next action on them. The only planning needed for 
“Get car inspected,” for example, would be to decide to 
check the Internet for the nearest inspection location and 
set up a time. 

There are two types of projects, however, that deserve at 
least some sort of planning activity: (1) those that still have 
your attention even after you’ve determined their next 
actions, and (2) those about which potentially useful ideas 
and supportive detail just show up ad hoc. 

The first type—the projects that you know have other 
things about them that must be decided on and organized— 
will need a more detailed approach than just identifying a 
next action. For these you’ll need a more specific 
application of one or more of the other four phases of the 
natural planning model: purpose and principles, 
vision/outcome, brainstorming, and/or organizing. 

The second type—the projects for which ideas just show 
up, ad hoc, when you’re on a beach or in a car or ina 
meeting—need to have an appropriate place into which 
these associated ideas can be captured. Then they can 
reside there for later use as needed. 


Projects That Need Next Actions About Planning 


There are probably a few projects you can think of right 
now, off the top of your head, that you know you want to get 
more objectified, fleshed out, and under control. Perhaps 
you have an important meeting coming up and you know 
you have to prepare an agenda and materials for it. Or 
you’ve just inherited the job of coordinating the annual 
associates’ conference, and you’ve got to get it organized as 
soon as possible so you can start delegating significant 
pieces. Or you need to think about and handle plans for an 
upcoming holiday with your family. If you haven’t done it 
already, get a next action now that will start the planning 
process for each of these, and put it on the appropriate 
action list. Then proceed with further planning steps. 


Typical Planning Steps 


The most common types of planning-oriented actions will be 
your own brainstorming and organizing, setting up 
meetings, and gathering information. 


Brainstorming Some of the projects that have your 
attention right now will require you to do your own free- 
form thinking; this is especially true of those for which you 
were not clear about what the next action would be when 
you made that decision. These should all have a next action, 
such as “Draft ideas re X.” 

You need to decide where and how you want to do that 
action, in order to know which action list to put it on. Do 
you do this kind of thinking best on a computer, or by 
handwriting your thoughts on paper? I may choose either 
medium, depending on what my intuition tells me. For me 
this next action would go either on my “At Computer” list or 
on “Anywhere” (because I can draw mind maps or take 
rough notes wherever I am, as long as I have pen and 
paper). 


Organizing You may have some projects for which you have 
already collected notes and miscellaneous support 
materials, and you just need to sort through them and get 
them into a more structured form. In this case, your next 
action would likely be “Organize Project X notes.” If you 
have to be in your office to do that (because that’s where 
the files are, and you don’t want to carry them around), that 
action should go on your “At Office” action list. If you’re 
carrying the project notes around with you in a folder, or in 
some digital device, then the “Organize .. .” action would 
go on an “Anywhere” action list if you’re going to do it by 
hand, or on “At Computer” if you’re going to use a word 
processing or outlining program, or presentation, mind- 
mapping, or project-planning software. 


One of the greatest blocks to organizational (and family) productivity is 
the lack of decision by someone about the need for a meeting, and 
with whom, to move something forward. 


Setting Up Meetings Often the next progress to be made on 
project thinking is to set up a meeting with the people you’d 
like to have involved in the brainstorming and/or decision 
making. That usually means sending an e-mail to the whole 
group or to an assistant to get it calendared, or making a 
phone call to the primary person to nail down a day and 
time. 


Gathering Information Sometimes the next task on project 
thinking is to gather more data. Maybe you need to talk to 
someone to get his or her input (“Call Bill re his thoughts on 
the managers’ meeting”). Or you need to look through the 
files you just inherited from last year’s conference (“Review 
Associate Conference archive files”). Or you want to surf 
the Web to get a sense of what’s happening “out there” ona 


new topic you’re exploring (“Look into college scholarship 
funds”). 


Random Project Thinking 


Don’t lose any ideas about projects that could potentially be 
useful. Many times you'll think of something you don’t want 
to forget when you’re in a place that has nothing to do with 
the project. You’re driving to the store, for example, and 
you think of a great way to start off the next staff meeting. 
Or you’re stirring the spaghetti sauce in the kitchen and it 
occurs to you that you might want to give out nice tote bags 
to participants in the upcoming conference. Or you’re 
watching the evening news when you suddenly remember 
another key person you may want to include in the advisory 
council you’re putting together. 

If these aren’t specifically next actions that can go 
directly on your action lists, you'll still need to capture and 
organize them somewhere that makes sense. Of course, the 
most critical tool for ensuring that nothing gets lost is your 
collection system—your in-tray, pen and paper, or 
smartphone. You need to hold all your ideas until you later 
decide what to do with them. 


Tools and Structures That Support Project 
Thinking 

No matter at what level project ideas show up, it’s great to 

have good tools always close at hand for capturing them as 


they occur. Once they’ve been captured, it’s useful to have 
access to them whenever you need to refer to them. 


Thinking Tools 


Luck affects everything. Let your hook always be cast; in the stream 
where you least expect it there will be fish. 


—Ovid 


One of the great secrets to getting ideas and increasing 
your productivity is utilizing the function-follows-form 
phenomenon—great tools can trigger good thinking. (I’ve 
come up with some of my most productive thoughts when 
simply exploring a new software application that created an 
interesting or fun way to generate and capture data.) 

If you aren’t writing anything down, or inputting into a 
digital device, it’s extremely difficult to stay focused on 
anything for more than a few minutes, especially if you’re 
by yourself. But when you utilize physical tools to keep your 
thinking anchored and saved, you can stay engaged 
constructively for hours. 


Writing Instruments 


Function often follows form. Give yourself a context for capturing 
thoughts, and thoughts will occur that you don’t yet know you have. 


Keep good writing tools around all the time so you never 
have any unconscious resistance to thinking due to not 
having anything to capture it with. If I don’t have something 
to write with or text or type into, I know I’m not as 
comfortable letting myself think progressively about 
projects and situations. 

Conversely, I have done some great thinking and 
planning at times just because I wanted to use my great- 
feeling, smooth-writing fountain or gel pen! You may not be 


inspired by cool gear like I am, but if you are, do yourself a 
favor and invest in quality writing tools. 

I also suggest that you keep nice pens at each of the 
stations where you’re likely to want to take notes—at your 
desk(s), in the kitchen, in your briefcases, satchels, purses, 
and backpacks. 


Paper and Pads 


Where is your closest writing pad? Keep it closer. 


In addition to writing tools, you should always have their 
functional equivalent—pads of paper—close at hand. 
Perforated paper is preferable to solid notebooks, because 
you want to be able to tear off pages with ideas and notes 
and toss them into your in-tray until you get a chance to 
process them. Also, you may find it valuable to keep some of 
your early and informal jotted mind maps and notes 
(original or scanned) in appropriate files. The handwritten 
trails often contain rich context memory jogs that prove 
valuable later on. 


Easels and Whiteboards 


How do I know what I think, until I hear what I say? 


—F, M. Forster 


If you have room for them, whiteboards and/or easel pads 
are very functional thinking tools to use from time to time. 
They give you plenty of space on which to jot down ideas, 
and it can be useful to keep them up in front of you fora 
while, as you incubate on a topic. Whiteboards are great to 


have on a wall in your office and in meeting rooms, and the 
bigger the better. Some companies have designed whole 
internal walls as erasable writing surfaces, fostering 
brainstorming and ad hoc visual communications. If you 
have children, I recommend that you install one in their 
bedrooms (I wish I had grown up with the encouragement 
to have as many ideas as I could!). Be sure to keep plenty of 
fresh markers on hand—nothing stifles creative thinking 
faster than dry and useless writing tools. 

Whenever two or more people are gathered fora 
meeting, someone should start writing somewhere where 
the other(s) can see. Even if you erase the thoughts after a 
few minutes, just the act of writing them down facilitates a 
constructive thinking process like nothing else. (I’ve found 
it immensely helpful at times to draw informal diagrams 
and notes on paper tablecloths, place mats, or even napkins 
in restaurants, if I didn’t have my own pad of paper at 
hand.) 


Thinking in Your Digital Tools 


Many times I like to think on my laptop (and, less frequently, 
on my tablet), within my word processing, mind-mapping, 
outlining, presentation, or spreadsheet programs. There 
are so many things I might want to do later on with my 
thinking, and it feels terrific to already have it in some 
digital form for later editing, and cutting and pasting into 
various other applications. Once I’ve booted up and the 
screen is ready in front of me, I find that thinking just 
automatically starts to happen. This is another good reason 
to ensure that your typing and keyboard skills are sufficient 
to make engaging with the computer at least easy, if not 
downright fun. 

Just as larger whiteboards facilitate more creative 
connections and expanded thought horizons, I have found 


that larger and additional computer screens provide a 
similar usefulness. As the world has rapidly become both 
digital and mobile, people have understandably 
experienced a tremendous increase in access and efficiency 
with their ever-smaller devices. I suggest, however, that the 
value of smartphones and the like is for the execution of the 
results of thinking—not for generating creative thought.* 
For that I want more space, not less. 


The Support Structures 


In addition to good tools ubiquitously at hand, it is 
productive to have accessible formats into which project 
thinking can be captured. Much as a good pen and paper in 
front of you support brainstorming, having good tools and 
places for organizing project details facilitates the more 
linear planning that many projects need. 


Create File Folders or Loose-Leaf Pages as Needed 


If you don’t have a good system for storing bad ideas, you probably 
don’t have one for filing good ones, either. 


A good general-reference filing system, right at hand and 
easy to use, is not only critical to manage the general 
workflow process, but highly functional for project thinking 
as well. Often a project begins to emerge when it’s 
triggered by relevant data, notes, and miscellaneous 
materials, and for this reason, you'll want to create a folder 
for a topic as soon as you have something to put in it. If your 
filing system is too formal (or nonexistent), you'll probably 
miss many opportunities to generate a project focus 
sufficiently early. As soon as you return from that first 


meeting with your initial notes about a topic that has just 
emerged on the horizon, create a file and store them in it 
right away (after you have gleaned any next actions, of 
course). 

Many times, while coaching clients, I find that the mere 
act of creating a file for a topic into which we can organize 
random notes and potentially relevant materials gives them 
a significantly improved sense of control. It’s a way of 
physically, visibly, and psychologically getting their “arms 
around it.” 

If you like to work with a loose-leaf notebook or planner, 
it’s good to keep an inventory of fresh notepaper or graph 
paper that you can use to set up a page on a theme or 
project as it shows up. While some projects may later 
deserve a whole tabbed section or even an entire notebook 
of their own, they don’t start out that way. And most of your 
projects may need only a page or two to hold the few ideas 
you need to track. 


Paper Versus Digital 


For those who have become increasingly digitally oriented, 
it is tempting to try to eliminate paper altogether. 
Theoretically that shouldn’t be a problem, with all the 
digital note-taking, scanning, and character-recognition 
tools available. In practice, however, paper still provides 
high value for most of us. Handwritten note taking is not 
going away, for multiple reasons, not the least of which is 
the universality of the tools and the range of graphic 
representations available. We tend to think differently when 
we express with different equipment, and many people find 
that writing and drawing by hand unwraps a broader 
palette of ideas. 

Also, paper-based materials allow us to be reminded of 
information, relationships, and perspectives more readily 


than what we can see at any one time on a computer 
screen. I personally know of many digitally savvy people 
who have returned to using paper planners and notebooks 
because they found them easier to use to coordinate their 
own thinking and reminders. Many times I will print 
documents related to a person, project, or topic, which I 
then hold in a physical file folder to use in a meeting or for 
my own writing and research. Though much of that paper 
will be recycled and the updated information returned to a 
digital home, the physical materials in the interim serve a 
function of which the computer by itself is still incapable. 

Digital technology will undoubtedly continue to emerge, 
which will contribute vastly to thinking, planning, and 
decision support in ways that low-tech materials and tools 
cannot. But until pens, notepads, Post-its, physical folders, 
and printed documents can be replaced by something 
better, they will still need to play some part in your 
coordinated personal management system.— 


Software Tools 


I have yet to discover any one perfect project-management 
tool. The plethora of applications that purport to serve that 
function are usually either too high-powered or too 
simplistic for what most of us need to manage. And as I’ve 
noted, I have never seen any two projects that needed the 
same amount of detailing and structure to get them under 
control. So it would be difficult to create any one 
application that would suffice for the majority. The rest of us 
usually find bits and pieces of applications more informal 
and project-friendly. 

That said, there are multiple kinds of digital tools that 
can be extremely useful. Most professionals are familiar 
with word processing programs, spreadsheets, and 
presentation programs, any of which might be the optimal 


way to structure project plans or portions thereof, 
especially once the purpose, vision, and brainstorming 
phases have been handled. 

The two types of software that tend to be more useful for 
informal planning and brainstorming are mind-mapping 
and outlining applications. I personally use a digital mind- 
mapping tool for most all of my projects as a way both to do 
focused brainstorming and to capture random thoughts 
about the projects as they show up ad hoc. In most cases 
the final mind map itself is sufficient organization for me to 
feel comfortable that I have the project under control. 

Another option for brainstorming is an outlining 
program, which allows the creation of headings and 
subheadings, in limited or expanded detail. Most good word 
processing programs also provide this functionality. The 
nice thing about these programs is that they can handle a 
wide range of complexity—from the simplest few bullet 
points about organizing a party to generating the structure 
for a whole book you’re writing. Though outlining and word 
processing programs tend to support more structured 
thinking, because of the ease of cutting, pasting, and 
rearranging text in the digital world, they still allow for 
plenty of creative thought development. 


ig Office Move.doc - Microsoft Word 











+ Edit View Insert Format Tools Table W Window Kathryn Jodi Me 





=z | 100% 





¥ 





iH setting) out of where we are 
= Purge and clean 
® Packing 
? Moving supplies 
= Boxes 
= Hand trucks 
= Tape 
= Paper 
= Schedule 
New location 
Layout 
Wiring 
= Parking 
Lighting 
Security 
® New office setup 
= Furnittire 
= Desk locations 
& Equipment 
+ Computers 
= Connections 


= Phones 
= Fax 


Other changes 
= Stationery 
& Communications 


mri. ..4— 


oP 


0 


0 


0 


0 


ot) 


ae Sec 1 At 1" Ln 1 
start | i] € Ga = J fa) Office Move.doc - Micr.. 





DIGITAL OUTLINING 


On the high end of the spectrum is complex project- 
management software. Professionals and organizations that 
have very specific needs for which the rigor and details 
managed by those applications are required usually have 
and use these tools already, in order to function. And they 
are most often customized for company-specific projects. 
This is the software that is used to launch Mars probes, 
coordinate building construction, and deliver airplanes and 
pharmaceuticals. 

On the lowest end of the digital project-management 
scale is jotting ideas in the Notes section of a Task item that 
lists one of your projects, or using generic note-generating 
and organizing software, creating a note for a project with 
its associated thoughts. 

If you are computer savvy, you will no doubt use several 
of these modalities for developing and capturing project 
plans and collateral material. Make sure you create comfort 
with the applications, so you can focus more on your project 
thinking than on the software. It will also behoove you to do 
regular reviews and updating of this content, wherever it is, 
and keep it current with consistent purging and 
reorganizing. Remember that the computer is a bit ofa 
black hole, and as memory and storage capacity continue to 
expand and new cool applications for pieces of this 
functionality continue to proliferate, it becomes easier to 
keep everything and then lose a coordinated orientation of 
your active stuff. 


How Do I Apply All This in My World? 


Just as your Next Actions lists need to be up-to-date, so, too, 
does your Projects list. That done, give yourself a block of 
time, ideally between one and three hours, to handle as 
much of the vertical thinking about each project as you can. 


Clear the deck, create a context, and do some creative project 
thinking. You'll then be way ahead of most people. 


At the very least, right now or as soon as possible, take 
those few of your projects that you have the most attention 
on or interest in right now and do some thinking, collecting, 
and organizing on them, using whatever tools seem most 
appropriate. 


Let our advance worrying become our advance thinking and planning. 


—Winston Churchill 


Focus on each, one at a time, top to bottom. As you do, 
ask yourself, “What about this do I want to know, capture, 
or remember?” 

You may just want to mind-map some thoughts on a piece 
of paper, make a file, and toss the paper into it. You may 
come up with some simple bullet-point headings to attach 
as a note in your digital/mobile organizer. Or you could 
create a word processing document and start an outline on 
it. 

The key is to get comfortable with having and using your 
ideas. And to acquire the habit of focusing your energy 
constructively, on intended outcomes and open loops, 
before you have to. 


part 
3 


The Power of the Key 
Principles 





The Power of the Capturing Habit 


Demonstrating integrity in managing internal and external agreements 
optimizes all of your relationships. 


THERE’S MUCH more tO these simple techniques and models than 
may appear at first glance. Indeed, they offer a systematic 
method to keep your mind distraction-free, ensuring a high 
level of efficiency and effectiveness in your work. That in 
itself would be sufficient reason to implement these 
practices. 

But there are even greater implications for the 
fundamental principles at work here. What follows in the 
next three chapters is an accounting of my experience, over 
the past thirty years, of the subtler and often more 
profound effects that can transpire from the 
implementation of these basic principles. The longer-term 
results can have a significant impact on you as an 
individual, and they can positively affect larger 
organizational cultures as well. 

When people with whom you interact notice that without 
fail you receive, process, and organize in an airtight 
manner the exchanges and agreements they have with you, 
they begin to trust you in a unique way. More significantly, 
you incorporate a level of self-confidence in your 
engagement with your world that money cannot buy. Such 
is the power of capturing placeholders for anything that is 


incomplete or unprocessed in your life. It noticeably 
enhances your mental well-being and improves the quality 
of your communications and relationships, both personally 
and professionally. 

And when organizations expect and reinforce this best 
practice of allowing nothing to fall through a 
communication crack, with everyone accountable for 
resulting actions, and commitments clarified and tracked by 
the appropriate persons, it can significantly increase a 
culture’s productivity and reduce its stress. 


The Personal Benefit 


How did it feel to go through the collecting and 
downloading activity? Most people say it feels so bad, and 
yet so good. How can that be? 

If you’re like most people who go through the full 
capturing process, you probably felt some form of anxiety. 
Descriptive terms like overwhelmed, panic, frustration, 
fatigue, and disgust tend to come up when I ask seminar 
participants to describe their emotions in going through a 
minor version of this procedure. And is there anything you 
think you’ve procrastinated on in that stack? If so, you have 
guilt automatically associated with it—“I could have, should 
have, ought to have done this before now.” 

At the same time, did you experience any sense of 
release, or relief, or control as you did the drill? Most 
people say yes, indeed. How does that happen? Totally 
opposite emotional states showing up as you’re doing a 
single exercise, almost at the same time—anxiety and relief; 
overwhelmed and in control. What’s going on here? 

When you understand the source of your negative 
feelings about all your stuff, you’ll discover, as I did, the way 
to get rid of them. And if you experienced any positive 


feelings from collecting your stuff, you actually began the 
process of eliminating the negativity yourself. 


The Source of the Negative Feelings 


The sense of anxiety and guilt doesn’t come from having too much to 
do; it’s the automatic result of breaking agreements with yourself. 


Where do the not-so-good feelings come from? Too much to 
do? No, there’s always too much to do. If you felt bad simply 
because there was more to do than you could do, you’d 
never get rid of that feeling. Having too much to do is not 
the source of the negative feeling. It comes from a different 
place. 

How have you felt when someone broke an agreement 
with you, told you they would meet you Thursday at four 
p.m. and never showed or called? How did that feel? 
Frustrating, I imagine. The price people pay when they 
break an agreement in the world is the disintegration of 
trust in the relationship—an automatic negative 
consequence. 

But what are all those things in your in-tray? Agreements 
you’ve made or at least implicitly accepted with yourself— 
things you somehow have told yourself you should deal with 
in some way. Your negative feelings are simply the result of 
breaking those agreements—they’re the symptoms of 
disintegrated selftrust. If you tell yourself to draft a 
strategic plan, when you don’t do it, you feel bad. Tell 
yourself to get organized, and if you fail to, welcome to guilt 
and frustration. Resolve to spend more time with your kids 
and then don’t—voila! anxious and overwhelmed. 


How Do You Prevent Broken Agreements with 
Yourself? 


If the negative feelings come from broken agreements, you 
have three options for dealing with them and eliminating 
the negative consequences: 


e Don’t make the agreement. 
e Complete the agreement. 
e Renegotiate the agreement. 


All of these can work to get rid of the unpleasant 
feelings. 


Don’t Make the Agreement 


It probably felt pretty good to take a bunch of your old stuff, 
decide that you weren’t going to do anything with it, and 
just shred, recycle, or toss it into the trash. One way to 
handle an incompletion in your world is to just say no! 

You'd lighten up a lot if you would just lower your 
standards. If you didn’t care so much about things being up 
to a certain level—your parenting, your school system, your 
team’s morale, the software code—you’d have fewer things 
to do or have attention on.* 

I doubt you’re going to lower your standards. But once 
you really understand the consequences, you'll probably 
make fewer agreements. I know I did. I used to make a lot 
of them, just to win people’s approval. When I realized the 
price I was paying on the back end for not keeping those 
agreements, I became a lot more conscious about the ones I 
made. One insurance executive I worked with described the 
major benefit he derived from implementation of this 
system: “Previously I would just tell everyone, ‘Sure, I’ll do 
it,’ because I didn’t know how much I really had to do. Now 
that I’ve got the inventory clear and complete, just to 


maintain my integrity, I have had to say, ‘No, I can’t do that, 
I’m sorry.’ The amazing thing is that instead of being upset 
with my refusal, everyone was impressed with my 
discipline!” 


Maintaining an objective and complete inventory of your work, 
regularly reviewed, makes it much easier to say no with integrity. 


Another client, an entrepreneur in the personal coaching 
business, recently told me that making an inventory of his 
work had eliminated a huge amount of worry and stress 
from his life. The discipline of putting everything he had his 
attention on into his in-tray caused him to reconsider what 
he really wanted to do anything about. If he wasn’t willing 
to toss a note about it into “in,” he just let it go! 

I consider that very mature thinking. One of the best 
things about this whole method is that when you really take 
on the responsibility to capture and track what’s on your 
mind, you'll think twice about making commitments 
internally that you don’t really need or want to make. In my 
many years of working with people to get their list of 
Projects clear and current, every single person has decided 
that something was not worth doing that they thought they 
were committed to. Not being aware of all you have to do is 
much like having a credit card for which you don’t know the 
balance or the limit—it’s a lot easier to be careless with 
your commitments. 


Complete the Agreement 


Of course, another way to get rid of the negative feelings 
about your stuff is to just finish it and be able to mark it off 
as done. You actually love to do things, as long as you get 
the feeling that you’ve completed something. If you’ve 


begun to take less-than-two-minute actions as they surface 
in your life, I’m sure you can attest to the psychological 
benefit. Most people I work with feel fantastic after just a 
couple of hours of processing their piles, simply because of 
how many things they accomplish using the two-minute 
rule. 


Out of the strain of the doing, into the peace of the done. 


—Julia Louise Woodruff 


One of your better weekends may be spent just finishing 
up a lot of little errands and tasks that have accumulated 
around your house and in your personal life. Invariably 
when you capture all the open loops, little and big, and see 
them on a list in front of you, some part of you will be 
inspired (or creatively disgusted or intimidated enough) to 
go knock them off the list. 

We all seem to be starved for a win. It’s great to satisfy 
that by giving yourself doable tasks you can start and finish 
easily. Have you ever completed something that wasn’t 
initially on a list, so you wrote it down and checked it off? 
Then you know what I mean. 

There’s another issue here, however. How would you feel 
if your list and your stack were totally—and successfully— 
completed? You’d probably be bouncing off the ceiling, full 
of creative energy. Of course, within three days (if not three 
minutes!), guess what you’d have? Right—another list, and 
probably an even bigger one, with more potentially 
daunting things to do on it! You’d feel so good about 
finishing all your stuff you’d likely take on bigger, more 
ambitious things to do. 

Not only that, but if you have a boss (or a board), what 
do you think he or she or they are going to do after noticing 
the high levels of competency and productivity you’re 


demonstrating? Right again—give you more things to do! 
It’s the irony of professional development—the better you 
get, the better you’d better get. 

So, since you’re not going to significantly lower your 
standards or stop creating more things to do, you’d better 
get comfortable with the third option, if you want to keep 
from being stressed out. 


Renegotiate the Agreement 


Suppose I’d told you I would meet you Thursday at four 
p.m., but after I made the appointment, my world changed. 
Now, given my new priorities, I decide I’m not going to 
meet you Thursday at four. But instead of simply not 
showing up, what had I better do, to maintain the integrity 
of the relationship? Correct—call and change the 
agreement. A renegotiated agreement is not a broken one. 


It is the act of forgiveness that opens up the only possible way to think 
creatively about the future at all. 


—Father Desmond Wilson 


Do you understand yet why getting all your stuff out of 
your head and in front of you makes you feel better? 
Because you automatically renegotiate your agreements 
with yourself when you look at them, think about them, and 
either act on them that very moment or say, “No, not now.” 
Here’s the problem: it’s impossible to renegotiate 
agreements with yourself that you can’t remember you 
made! 

The fact that you can’t remember an agreement you 
made with yourself doesn’t mean that you’re not holding 
yourself liable for it. Ask any psychologist how much ofa 
sense of past and future that part of your psyche has, the 


part that was storing the list you dumped: zero. It’s all 
present tense in there. That means that as soon as you tell 
yourself that you should do something, if you file it only in 
your short-term memory, that part of you thinks you should 
be doing it all the time. And that means that as soon as 
you’ve given yourself two things to do, and filed them only 
in your head, you’ve created instant and automatic stress 
and failure, because you can’t do them both at once, and 
that (apparently significant) part of your psyche will 
continue to hold you accountable. 

If you’re like most people, you’ve probably got some 
storage area at home—maybe a basement that you told 
yourself a while back (maybe even ten years ago!) you 
ought to clean and organize. If so, there’s a part of you that 
likely thinks you should’ve been cleaning your basement 
twenty-four hours a day for the past ten years! No wonder 
people are so tired! And have you heard that little voice 
inside your own mental committee every time you walk by 
that area? “Why are we walking by the basement? Aren’t 
we supposed to be cleaning it?” Because you can’t stand 
that whining, nagging part of yourself, you never even go 
into that area anymore if you can help it. If you want to shut 
that voice up, you have three options for dealing with your 
agreement with yourself. 

I’m quite sincere about this. It seems that there’s a part 
of our consciousness that doesn’t know the difference 
between an agreement about cleaning the basement and an 
agreement about buying a company or improving our 
personal finances. In there, they’re all just agreements— 
kept or broken. If you’re holding something only internally, 
it will be a broken agreement if you’re not moving on it in 
the moment. 


The Radical Departure from Traditional Time 
Management 


This method is significantly different from traditional time- 
management training. Most of those models leave you with 
the impression that if something you tell yourself to do isn’t 
that important, it’s not worth it to track, manage, or deal 
with. But in my experience that’s inaccurate, at least in 
terms of how a less-than-conscious part of us operates. It is 
how our conscious mind operates, however, so every 
agreement must be made conscious. That means it must be 
captured, clarified, and reviewed objectively and regularly 
in full conscious awareness so that you can put it where it 
belongs in your self-management arena. If that doesn’t 
happen, it will actually take up a lot more of your internal 
energy than it deserves. 

In my experience, anything that is held only in your head 
will take up either more or less attention than it deserves. 
The reason to collect everything is not that everything is 
equally important; it’s that it’s not. Incompletions, 
uncaptured, take on a dull sameness in the sense of the 
pressure they create and the attention they tie up. 


How Much Capturing Is Required? 


You'll feel better collecting anything that you haven’t 
captured yet. When you say to yourself, “Oh, that’s right, I 
need to get butter the next time I’m at the store,” and you 
write it on your grocery list, you’ll feel better. When you 
remember, “I’ve got to call my financial adviser about the 
trust fund,” and you write that down someplace where you 
know you'll see it when you have a phone and time, you'll 
feel better. But there’s still a light-year’s difference when 
you know you have it all. 


When will you know how much you have left in your head 
to capture? Only when there’s nothing left. If some part of 
you is even vaguely aware that you don’t have it all, you 
can’t really know what percentage you have collected. How 
will you know when there’s nothing left? When nothing else 
shows up as a reminder in your mind. 


When the only thing on your mind is the only thing on your mind, 
you'll be “present,” in your “zone,” with no distinction between work 
and play. 


This doesn’t mean that your mind will be empty. If you’re 
conscious, your mind will always be focusing on something. 
But if it’s focusing on only one thing at a time, without 
distraction, you'll be in your “zone.” 

I suggest that you use your mind to think about things, 
rather than think ofthem. You want to be adding value as 
you think about projects and situations, not creating stress 
by simply reminding yourself they exist and you need to do 
something about them. To fully realize that more productive 
place, you will need to capture it all. It takes focus anda 
change of habit to train yourself to recognize and download 
even the smallest agreements with yourself as they’re 
created in your mind. Doing the capturing process as fully 
as you can, and then incorporating the behavior of 
gathering all the new things as they emerge, will be more 
empowering and productive than you can imagine. 


When Relationships and Organizations 
Have the Capture Habit 


What happens when everyone involved on a team—in a 
marriage, in a department, on a staff, in a family, ina 
company—can be trusted not to let anything slip through 


the cracks? Frankly, once you’ve achieved that, you'll hardly 
think about whether people are dropping the ball anymore 
—there will be much bigger and better things to occupy 
your attention. 


Having to bail water in a leaky boat undermines your ability to direct it 
and move it forward. 


But if communication gaps are still an issue, there’s likely 
some layer of frustration and a general nervousness in the 
relationship or the culture. Most people feel that without 
constant babysitting and hand-holding, things could 
disappear in the system and then blow up at any time. They 
don’t realize that they’re feeling this because they’ve been 
in this situation so consistently that they relate to it as if it 
were a permanent law, like gravity. It doesn’t have to be 
that way. 

I have noticed this for years. Good people who haven’t 
incorporated these behaviors come into my environment, 
and they stick out like a sore thumb. I’ve lived with the 
standards of a clear head and hard, clean edges on in-trays 
for more than three decades now. When a note sits idle in 
someone’s in-tray unprocessed, or when he or she nods, 
“Yes, I will,” in a conversation but doesn’t otherwise 
capture that in some way, my “uh-oh” bell rings. This is 
unacceptable behavior in my world. There are much bigger 
fish to fry than worrying about leaks in the system. 

I need to trust that any request or relevant information I 
put in an e-mail, on a voice mail, in a conversation, or ina 
written note will get into the other person’s system and that 
it will be processed and organized soon, and available for 
his or her review as an option for action. If the recipient is 
Managing voice mails but not e-mail and paper, I have now 
been hamstrung to use only his or her trusted medium. 


That should be unacceptable behavior in any organization 
that cares about whether things happen with the least 
amount of effort. 

When change is required, there must be trust that the 
initiatives for that change will be dealt with appropriately. 
Any intact system will ultimately be only as good as its 
weakest link, and often that Achilles’ heel is a key person’s 
dulled responsiveness to communications in the system. 

I especially notice this when I walk around organizations 
where in-trays are either nonexistent or overflowing and 
obviously long unprocessed. These cultures usually suffer 
from serious “interrupt-itis” because they can’t trust 
putting communications into the system. I come across 
executives whose calendars are insanely overbooked but 
who, when they begin to give timely responses to their e- 
mails, experience a dramatic relief from that pressure. 
When their staff and others are getting what they need in 
terms of appropriate feedback and decisions through that 
virtual medium, they no longer need the kind of face-to-face 
time they previously tried to get with meetings. 

Where cultures do have solid systems, down through the 
low-tech level of paper communications, the clarity is 
palpable. It’s hardly even a conscious concern, and 
everyone’s attention is more focused. The same is true in 
families that have installed in-trays—the parents, the 
children, the nanny, the housekeeper, or anyone else with 
whom family members frequently interact. People often 
grimace when I tell them that my wife and I put things in 
each other’s in-trays, even when we'’re sitting within a few 
feet of each other; to them it seems cold and mechanical. 
Aside from being an act of politeness intended to avoid 
interrupting the other’s work in progress, the practice 
actually fosters more warmth and freedom between us, 
because mechanical things are being handled in the system 
instead of tying up our attention on the relationship. 


Organizations must create a culture in which it is acceptable that 
everyone has more to do than he or she can do, and in which it is sage 
to renegotiate agreements about what everyone is not doing. 


Unfortunately, you can’t legislate personal systems. 
Everyone must have his or her own way to deal with what 
he or she has to deal with. You can, however, hold people 
accountable for outcomes, and for tracking and managing 
everything that comes their way. And you can give them the 
information in this book. Then, at least, they’ll have no 
excuse for letting something fall through the cracks. 

This doesn’t mean that everyone has to do everything. I 
hope I have described a way to relate to our knowledge- 
based world that provides room for everyone to have a lot 
more to do than he or she can do. The critical issue will be 
to facilitate a constant renegotiation process with all 
involved, so they feel OK about what they’re not doing. 
That’s real knowledge work, at a more sophisticated level. 
But there’s little hope of getting there without having 
bulletproof capture systems in play. Remember, you can’t 
renegotiate an agreement with yourself that you can’t 
remember you made. And you certainly can’t renegotiate 
agreements with others that you and they have lost track of. 

When groups of people collectively adopt the 100 
percent capture standard, they have a tight ship to sail. It 
doesn’t mean they’re sailing in the right direction, or even 
that they’re on the right ship; it just means that the one 
they’re on, in the direction it’s going, is sailing with the 
most efficient energy it can. 


The Power of the Next-Action 
Decision 


When a culture adopts “What’s the next action?” as a standard 
operating query, there’s an automatic increase in energy, productivity, 
clarity, and focus. 


1HAvE Apersonal mission to make “What’s the next action?” 
part of our global thought process. I envision a world in 
which no meeting or discussion will end, and no interaction 
cease, without a clear indication of whether or not some 
action is needed—and if it is, what it will be, or at least who 
has accountability for it. I envision organizations adopting a 
standard that anything that lands in anyone’s field of 
awareness will be evaluated for action required, and the 
resulting decisions managed appropriately. Imagine the 
freedom that would provide for people and organizations to 
focus their attention on bigger issues and opportunities. 

Over the years I have noticed an extraordinary shift in 
energy and productivity whenever individuals and groups 
installed “What’s the next action?” as a fundamental and 
consistently asked question. As simple as the query seems, 
it is still somewhat rare to find it fully operational where it 
needs to be. 

One of the greatest challenges you may encounter is that 
once you have gotten used to “What’s the next action?” for 


yourself and those around you, interacting with people who 
aren’t asking it can be highly frustrating. It clarifies things 
so quickly that dealing with people and environments that 
don’t use it can seem nightmarish. 

We are all accountable for defining what, if anything, we 
are committed to make happen as we engage with others 
and ourselves. And at some point, for any outcome that we 
have an internal commitment to complete, we must make 
the decision about the next physical action required. 
There’s a great difference, however, between making that 
decision when things show up and doing it when they blow 


up. 


The Source of the Technique 


Doing a straightforward, clear-cut task that has a beginning and an 
end balances out the complexity-without-end that often vexes the rest 
of my life. Sacred simplicity. 


—Robert Fulghum 


I learned this simple but extraordinary next-action 
technique more than thirty years ago from a longtime 
friend and management-consultant mentor of mine, Dean 
Acheson (no relation to the former U.S. Secretary of State). 
Dean had spent many prior years consulting with 
executives and researching what was required to free up 
the logjams many of them had regarding projects and 
situations they were involved in, in order to release and 
galvanize energy for significant change required in their 
organizations. One day he just started picking up each 
individual piece of paper on an executive’s desk and forcing 
him to decide what the very next thing was that he had to 
do to move it forward. The results were so immediate and 


so profound for the executive that Dean continued for years 
to perfect a methodology using that same question to 
process the in-tray. Since then, given what I’ve developed 
using Dean’s insights, hundreds of thousands of people 
have been trained and coached with this key concept, and it 
remains a foolproof technique. 

This thought process is not something we are born doing, 
nor does it seem to come to us naturally. When you were 
born, it probably didn’t occur to you to ask your mother, 
“So, what are we doing here, and what’s the next action, 
and who has it?” It is a learned technique of thinking, 
decision making, and consciously directed focus. It will 
happen automatically for you when the situation obviously 
demands it, as in a crisis, or when the pressure in a 
situation (from the boss, a client, your child, or the 
unexpected circumstance) forces a next-action decision to 
avert painful consequences. But incorporating this as a 
proactive behavior, before the circumstances are so obvious 
and actions so immediately necessary, is an acquired 
practice.* Making it a part of your personal and 
organizational life never fails to improve both your 
productivity and peace of mind. 


Creating the Option of Doing 


How could something so simple be so powerful—“What’s 
the next action?” 

To help answer that question, I invite you to revisit for a 
moment your mind-sweep list (see page 115)—or at least to 
think about all the projects that are probably sitting around 
in your head. Do you have a sense that any of them haven’t 
been moving along as consistently and productively as they 
could be? You’ll probably admit that yes, indeed, a few have 
been a little bit stuck. 


If you haven’t known for sure whether you needed to 
make a call, send an e-mail, talk to someone, surf the Web 
about something, or buy an item at the store as the very 
next thing to move on, it hasn’t been getting done. What’s 
ironic is that it would likely require only about ten seconds 
of thinking to figure out what the next action would be for 
almost everything on your list. But it’s ten seconds of 
thinking and decision making that most people haven’t 
done about most things on their lists. 

For example, someone will have something like “tires” on 
a list. 

I then ask, “What’s that about?” 

He responds, “Well, I need new tires on my Car.” 

“So what’s the next action?” 

At that point he usually wrinkles up his forehead, 
ponders for a few moments, and expresses his conclusion: 
“Well, I need to check the Web for stores and prices for the 
tires.” 

That’s about how much time and cognitive investment is 
required to decide what the “doing” would look like on 
almost everything. It’s just the few seconds of focused 
thinking that most people have not yet done about most of 
their still unfinished stuff. 


The secret of getting ahead is getting started. The secret of getting 
started is breaking your complex overwhelming tasks into small, 
manageable tasks, and then starting on the first one. 


—Mark Twain 


It will probably be true, too, that the person who needs 
tires on his car has had that on his radar for quite a while. 
It’s also likely that he’s been on his computer hundreds of 
times, often with just enough time and energy to take that 
action. Why didn’t he do it? Because in that state of mind, 


the last thing in the world he felt like doing was considering 
all his projects, including getting tires, and what their next 
actions were. In those moments he didn’t feel like thinking 
at all. 

What he needed was to have already figured those things 
out. If he gets that next-action thinking done, then when he 
happens to have fifteen minutes before a meeting, at his 
computer, and his energy is about 4.2 out of 10, he can look 
at the list of things to do and be delighted to see “Research 
new tires” on it. “That’s something I can do and complete 
successfully!” he’ll think, and then he’ll actually be 
motivated to surf the Web about it, just to experience the 
“win” of completing something useful in the time and 
energy window he’s in. In this context he’d be incapable of 
starting a large proposal draft for a client, but he has 
sufficient resources for searching the Internet and getting 
simple information quickly. It’s highly probable that at some 
point he’ll look at a new set of tires on his car and feel on 
top of the world. 

Defining what real doing looks like on the most basic 
level and organizing placeholder reminders that we can 
trust are master keys to productivity enhancement and 
creating a relaxed inner environment. 


Without a next action, there remains a potentially infinite gap between 
current reality and what you need to do. 


Often even the simplest things are stuck because we 
haven’t made a final decision yet about the next action. 
People in my seminars often have things on their lists like 
“Get a tune-up for the car.” Is “Get a tune-up” a next 
action? Not unless you’re walking out to your car with 
wrench in hand, dressed to get greasy. 

“So, what’s the next action?” 


“Uh, I need to take the car to the garage. Oh, yeah, I 
need to find out if the garage can take it. I guess I need to 
call the garage and make the appointment.” 

“Do you have the number?” 

“Darn, no...Idon’t have the name and number for the 
garage. Fred recommended that garage to me, and I don’t 
have that information. I knew something was missing in the 
equation.” 

And that’s often what happens with so many things for so 
many people. We glance at the project, and some part of us 
thinks, “I don’t quite have all the pieces between here and 
there.” We know something is missing, but we’re not sure 
what it is, so we quit. 

“So, what’s the next action?” 

“T need to get the name and phone number. I guess I 
could get it from Fred.” 

“How could you do that?” 

“T can e-mail Fred!” 

So the next action really is “E-mail Fred for info re: the 
garage.” 

Did you notice how many steps had to be tracked back 
before we got to the real next action on this project? That’s 
typical. Most people have many things just like that on their 
lists and on their minds. 


Why Bright People Procrastinate the Most 


It’s really the smartest and most sensitive people who have 
the highest number of undecided things in their lives and 
on their lists. Why is that? Think of how our bodies respond 
to the images we hold in our minds. It appears that the 
nervous system can’t tell the difference between a well- 
imagined thought and reality. 


Bright people have the capability of freaking out faster and more 
dramatically than anyone else. 


To prove this to yourself, picture walking into a food 
market and approaching the brightly lit fruit-and-vegetable 
section. Are you there? OK, now go to the citrus bins— 
oranges, grapefruits, lemons. Now see the big pile of yellow 
lemons. There’s a cutting board and a knife next to them. 
Take one of those big yellow lemons and cut it in half 
lengthwise. Smell that citrus smell! It’s really juicy, and 
there’s lemon juice trickling onto the board. Now take a 
half lemon and cut that in half, so you have a quarter lemon 
wedge in your hands. OK, now—remember how you did this 
as a kid?—put that quarter of a lemon in your mouth and 
bite into it! Scrunch! 

If you played along with me, you probably noticed that 
the saliva content in your mouth increased at least a bit. 
Your body was actually trying to process citric acid! And it 
was just in your mind. If your body responds to the pictures 
you give it, how are you likely to feel physically when you 
think about, say, doing your taxes? Are you sending yourself 
easy, let’s go, completion, success, and “I’m a winner!” 
pictures? Probably not. For just that reason, what kinds of 
people would logically be the most resistant to being 
reminded about a project like that—that is, who would 
procrastinate the most? Of course, it would be the most 
creative, sensitive, and intelligent people—because their 
sensitivity and creativity give them the capability to 
produce in their minds lurid nightmare scenarios about 
what might be involved in doing the project, and all the 
negative consequences that might occur if it isn’t done 
perfectly! They just freak out in an instant and quit! 


Iam an old man, and I have known a great many troubles, but most of 
them never happened. 


—Mark Twain 


Who doesn’t procrastinate? Often it’s the insensitive oafs 
who just take something and start plodding forward, 
unaware of all the things that could go wrong. Everyone 
else tends to get hung up about all kinds of things. 

Do my taxes? Oh, no! It’s not going to be that easy. It’s 
going to be different this year, I’m sure. I saw the forms— 
they look different. There are probably new rules I’m going 
to have to figure out. I might have to read all that damn 
material. Long form, short form, medium form. File 
together with my partner? File separate? We’ll probably 
want to claim some new deductions, but if we do we’ll have 
to back them up, and that means we'll need all the receipts. 
Oh, my God—I don’t know if we really have all the receipts 
we'll need, and what if we didn’t have all the receipts but 
we Claimed the deductions anyway and we got audited? 
Audited? Oh, no—tax fraud! Jail! 

And so a lot of people psychologically put themselves in 
jail, just glancing at their tax forms—because they’re so 
smart, sensitive, and creative. In my many years of coaching 
individuals, this pattern has been borne out more times 
than I can count—usually it’s the brightest and most 
sophisticated folks who have the most stuck piles in their 
offices, homes, e-mail, and heads. Most of the executives I 
work with have at least several big, complex, and 
amorphous projects stacked either on top of a file cabinet 
or on a mental shelf. There always seem to be hobgoblin 
thoughts lurking inside them—“If we don’t look at or think 
about the projects, maybe they’ll stay quiet!” 


Ceasing negative imaging will always cause your energy to increase. 


So what’s the solution? There’s always having a drink. 
Numb it. Dumb it down. Notice what happens to many 
people when they get a little alcohol in their brain. It should 
drop their energy immediately, because it’s a depressant; 
often, though, the energy lifts, at least initially. Why? The 
alcohol is depressing something—it’s shutting down the 
negative self-talk and uncomfortable visions that are going 
on in these folks’ minds. Of course my energy will increase 
if 1 stop depressing myself with overwhelming pictures of 
not handling something successfully. But the numbing 
solutions are temporary at best. The stuff doesn’t go away. 
And unfortunately, when we numb ourselves, we can’t do it 
selectively—the source of inspiration and enthusiasm and 
personal energy also seems to get numbed. 


Intelligent Dumbing Down 


No matter how big and tough a problem may be, get rid of confusion 
by taking one little step toward solution. Do something. 


—George F. Nordenholt 


There is another solution: intelligently dumbing down your 
brain by figuring out the next action. You'll invariably feel a 
relieving of pressure about anything you have a 
commitment to change or do, when you decide on the very 
next physical action required to move it forward. Nothing, 
essentially, will change in the world. But shifting your focus 
to something that your mind perceives as a doable task will 
create a real increase in positive energy, direction, and 
motivation. If you have truly captured all the things that 
have your attention during the mind sweep, go through the 
list again now and decide on the single very next action to 


take on every one of them. Notice what happens to your 
energy. 


Everything on your lists and in your stacks is either attractive or 
repulsive to you—there’s no neutral ground when it comes to your 
stuff. 


You are either attracted or repelled by the things on your 
lists; there isn’t any neutral territory. You are either 
positively drawn toward completing the action or reluctant 
to think about what it is and resistant to getting involved in 
it. Often it’s simply the next-action decision that makes the 
difference between the two extremes. Thinking and 
deciding require energy. And when you notice something 
unfinished in your world but haven’t determined what the 
next action is yet, you'll tend to be reminded of your fatigue 
and sense of being overwhelmed! Hence most people’s 
reaction to their own lists and organizers is negative—not 
because of the contents per se, but rather because 
sufficient appropriate thinking has yet to be applied to 
them. 

In following up with people who have begun to 
implement this methodology, I’ve discovered that one of the 
subtler ways many of them fall off the wagon is in letting 
their action lists grow back into lists of tasks or subprojects 
instead of discrete next actions. They’re still ahead of most 
people because they’re actually writing things down, but 
they often find themselves stuck, and procrastinating, 
because they’ve allowed their action lists to harbor items 
like: 

“Meeting with the banquet committee” 

“Johnny’s birthday” 

“Receptionist” 

“Slide presentation” 


You can only cure retail but you can prevent wholesale. 


—Brock Chisholm 


In other words, things have morphed back into “stuff” 
instead of starting at the action level. There are no clear 
next actions here, and anyone keeping a list filled with 
items like this would send her brain into overload every 
time she looked at it. 

Is this extra work? Is figuring out the next action on your 
commitments additional effort that you don’t need to 
expend? No, of course not. If you need to get your car 
tuned, for instance, you’re going to have to figure out that 
next action at some point anyway. The problem is that most 
people wait to do it until the next action is “Call the Auto 
Club for tow truck!” 

So when do you think most people really make a lot of 
their next-action decisions about their stuff—when it shows 
up, or when it blows up? And do you think there might be a 
difference in the quality of their lives if they handled this 
knowledge work on the front end instead of the back? 
Which do you think is the more efficient way to move 
through life—deciding next actions on your projects as soon 
as they appear on your radar screen and then efficiently 
grouping them into categories of actions that you get done 
in certain uniform contexts, or avoiding thinking about 
what, exactly, needs to be done until it has to be done, then 
sputtering through your actions as you try to catch up and 
put out the fires? 


Avoiding action decisions until the pressure of the last minute creates 
huge inefficiencies and unnecessary stress. 


That may sound exaggerated, but when I ask groups of 
people to estimate when most of the action decisions are 


made in their companies, with few exceptions they say, 
“When things blow up.” One of our global corporate clients 
surveyed its population about sources of stress in its 
culture, and the number one complaint was the last-minute 
crisis work consistently promoted by team leaders who 
failed to make appropriate decisions on the front end. 


The Value of a Next-Action Decision- 
Making Standard 


I have had several sophisticated senior executives tell me 
that installing “What’s the next action?” as an operational 
standard in their organization was transformative in terms 
of measurable performance output. It changed their culture 
permanently and significantly for the better. 

Why? Because the question forces clarity, accountability, 
productivity, and empowerment. 


Clarity 


Too many discussions end with only a vague sense that 
people know what they have decided and are going to do. 
But without a clear conclusion that there is a next action, 
much less what it is and who’s got it, more often than nota 
lot of stuff gets left up in the air. 

I am frequently asked to facilitate meetings. I’ve learned 
the hard way that no matter where we are in the 
conversation, twenty minutes before the agreed end time of 
the discussion I must force the question: “So what’s the 
next action here?” In my experience, there is usually twenty 
minutes’ worth of clarifying (and sometimes tough 
decisions) still required to come up with an answer. 


Talk does not cook rice. 


—Chinese proverb 


This is radical common sense—radical because it often 
compels discussion at deeper levels than people are 
comfortable with. “Are we serious about this?” “Do we 
really know what we’re doing here?” “Are we really ready to 
allocate precious time and resources to this?” It’s very easy 
to avoid these more relevant levels of thinking. What 
prevents those issues from slipping away into amorphous 
stuff is forcing the decision about the next action. Some 
further conversation, exploration, deliberation, and 
negotiation are often needed to put the topic to rest. The 
world is too unpredictable these days to permit 
assumptions about outcomes: we need to take responsibility 
for moving things to clarity. 

You have to have some experience of this to really know 
what I mean here. If you do, you’re probably saying to 
yourself, “Yes!” If you’re not sure what I’m talking about, I 
suggest that in your next meeting with anyone, you end the 
conversation with the question, “So what’s the next action 
here?” Then notice what happens. 


Accountability 


The dark side of collaborative cultures is the allergy they 
foster to holding anyone responsible for having the ball. 
“Mine or yours?” is unfortunately not in the common 
vocabulary of many such organizations. There is a sense 
that that would be impolite. “We’re all in this together” is a 
worthy sentiment, but seldom a reality in the hard-nosed 
day-to-day world of work. Too many meetings end with a 
vague feeling among the players that something ought to 
happen, and the hope that it’s not their personal job to 
make it so. 


The way I see it, what’s truly impolite is allowing people 
to walk away from discussions unclear. Real togetherness of 
a group is reflected by the responsibility that all take for 
defining the real things to do and the specific people 
assigned to do them, so everyone is freed of the angst of 
still-undecided actions. 

Again, if you’ve been there, you’ll know what I’m talking 
about. If you haven’t, test it out—take a small risk and ask, 
“So what’s the next action on this?” at the end of each 
discussion point in your next staff meeting, or in your next 
family conversation around the dinner table. 


Productivity 


There are risks and costs to a program of action, but they are far less 
than the long-range risks and costs of comfortable inaction. 


—John F. Kennedy 


Organizations naturally become more productive when they 
model and train front-end next-action decision making. For 
all the reasons mentioned, determining the required 
physical allocation of resources necessary to make 
something happen as soon as the outcome has been 
Clarified will produce more results sooner, and with less 
effort. 


Productivity will improve only when individuals increase their 
operational responsiveness. And in knowledge work, that means 
clarifying actions on the front end instead of the back. 


Learning to break through the barriers of the 
sophisticated creative thinking that can freeze activity— 


that is, the entangled mental webs we spin—is a superior 
skill. “Productivity” has been touted for decades as a 
desirable thing to improve in organizations. Anything that 
can help maximize output will do that. But in the world of 
knowledge work, all the computers and telecom 
improvements and leadership seminars on the planet will 
make no difference in this regard unless the individuals 
involved increase their operational responsiveness. And 
that requires thinking about something that lands in your 
world before you have to.~ 


Empowerment 


Perhaps the greatest benefit of adopting the next-action 
approach is that it dramatically increases your ability to 
make things happen, with a concomitant rise in your self 
esteem and constructive outlook. 


Start by doing what’s necessary, then what’s possible, and suddenly 
you are doing the impossible. 


—Saint Francis of Assisi 


People are constantly doing things, but usually only when 
they have to, under fire from themselves or others. They get 
no sense of winning, or of being in control, or of 
cooperating among themselves and with their world. People 
are starving for those experiences. 

The daily behaviors that define the things that are 
incomplete and the moves that are needed to complete 
them must change. Getting things going of your own 
accord, before you’re forced to by external pressure and 
internal stress, builds a firm foundation of self-worth that 
will spread to every aspect of your life. You are the captain 


of your own ship; the more you act from that perspective, 
the better things will go for you. 

Asking yourself, “What’s the next action?” undermines 
the victim mentality. It presupposes that there is a 
possibility of change, and that there is something you can 
do to make it happen. That is the assumed affirmation in the 
behavior. And these kinds of assumed affirmations often 
work more fundamentally to build a positive self-image than 
can repeating, “I am a powerful, effective person, making 
things happen in my life!” a thousand times. 


People are always blaming their circumstances for what they are. I 
don’t believe in circumstances. The people who get on in this world 
are the people who get up and look for the circumstances they want, 
and, if they can’t find them, make them. 


—George Bernard Shaw 


Is there too much complaining in your culture? The next 
time someone moans about something, try asking, “So 
what’s the next action?” People will complain only about 
something that they assume could be better than it 
currently is. The action question forces the issue. If it can 
be changed, there’s some action that will change it. If it 
can’t, it must be considered part of the landscape to be 
incorporated in strategy and tactics. Complaining is a sign 
that someone isn’t willing to risk moving on a changeable 
situation, or won’t consider the immutable circumstance in 
his or her plans. This is a temporary and hollow form of self- 
validation. 

Although my colleagues and I rarely promote our work in 
this way, I notice people really empowering themselves 
every day as we coach them in applying the next-action 
technique. It increases the light in their eyes and the 
lightness in their step, and a sparkle shows up in their 
thinking and demeanor. We are all already powerful, but 


deciding on and effectively managing the physical actions 
required to move things forward seems to exercise that 
power in ways that call forward the more positive aspects of 
our nature. 

When you start to make things happen, you begin to 
believe that you can make things happen. And that makes 
things happen. 


The Power of Outcome Focusing 


THE Power of Cirecting our mental and imaginative processes 
to create change has been studied and promoted in 
thousands of contexts—from early “positive thinking” books 
to recent discoveries in advanced neurophysiology. 

My own interest has been in applying the principle in 
terms of practical reality: Does it help get things done? And 
if so, how do we best utilize it in managing the work of our 
lives? Can we really use this information in ways that allow 
us to produce what we want to have happen with less 
effort? The answer has been a resounding yes. 


Focus and the Fast Track 


Over the years I have seen the application of the method 
presented in this book create profound results for people in 
their day-to-day worlds. As you begin to use it habitually as 
your primary means of addressing all situations—from 
processing e-mails to buying a house or a company to 
structuring meetings or having conversations with your 
kids—your personal productivity can go through the roof. 
Many of the professionals I have worked with who 
integrated this method now find themselves experiencing 
enhanced or even new jobs, careers, and lifestyles. These 
processes really work in the arena of the ordinary things we 


must deal with daily—the stuff of our work. When you 
demonstrate to yourself and to others an increasing ability 
to get things done “in the trenches,” you probably won’t 
stay in the same trench for very long. Of course, those 
attracted to implementing Getting Things Done are usually 
already on a self-development path and don’t assume that 
they'll be doing the same things a year from now that 
they’re doing now, anyway. But they love the fact that this 
method gets them there faster and more easily. It’s 
interesting to note that the people who need this 
methodology the least are usually the ones who engage 
with it the quickest and the most. That puzzled me for a 
while until I realized that one of the most important results 
of its implementation is the relief of drag (as in “retarding 
force”). Who is the most interested in that? Those who are 
the most invested in moving themselves forward, quickly 
and easily. 

It’s been inspiring for me to learn and coach others how 
to deal with the immediate realities down where the rubber 
meets the road—and how to tie in the power of positive 
imagery to practical experiences in all our daily lives. 

The “fast track” alluded to here is a bit of a misnomer. 
For some, slowing down, getting out of the squirrel cage, 
and taking care of themselves may be the major change 
precipitated by this methodology.* The bottom line is it 
makes you more conscious, more focused, and more 
capable of implementing the changes and results you want, 
whatever they are. 

“Create a way to spend more time with my daughter” is 
as specific a project as any, and equally demanding of a next 
action to be determined. Having the vague, gnawing sense 
that you “should” do something about your relationship 
with your daughter, and not actually doing anything, can be 
a killer. I often work with people who are willing to 
acknowledge the real things of their lives at this level as 
“incompletes”—to write them down, define real projects 


about them, and ensure that next actions are decided on— 
until the finish line is crossed. That is real productivity, 
perhaps in its most awesome manifestation. 


The Significance of Applied Outcome 
Thinking 


What I want to emphasize now is how learning to process 
the details of our work and lives with this clear and 
consistent system can affect us and others in significant 
ways we may not expect. 


Defining specific projects and next actions that address real quality-of- 
life issues is productivity at its best. 


As I’ve said, employing next-action decision making 
results in clarity, productivity, accountability, and 
empowerment. Exactly the same results happen when you 
hold yourself to the discipline of identifying the real results 
you want and, more specifically, the projects you need to 
define in order to produce them. 

It’s all connected. You can’t really define the right action 
until you know the outcome you’re after, and your outcome 
is disconnected from reality if you’re not clear about what 
you need to do physically to make it happen. You can get at 
it from either direction, and you must, to get things done. 

As Steven Snyder, an expert in whole-brain learning and 
a friend of mine, put it, “There are only two problems in life: 
(1) you know what you want, and you don’t know how to get 
it; and/or (2) you don’t know what you want.” If that’s true 
(and I think it is) then there are only two solutions: 


e Make it up. 
e Make it happen. 


We are constantly creating and fulfilling. 


This can be construed from the models of yin/yang, right 
brain/left brain, creator/destroyer, visionary/implementer— 
or whatever equivalent framework works best for you. The 
truth is, our energy as human beings seems to have a 
dualistic and teleological reality—we create and identify 
with things that aren’t yet real on all the levels we 
experience; and when we do, we recognize how to 
restructure our current world to morph it into the new one, 
and experience an impetus to make it so. 

Things that have your attention need your intention 
engaged. “What does this mean to me?” “Why is it here?” 
“What do I want to have be true about this?” (“What’s the 
desired outcome?”) Everything you experience as 
incomplete must have a reference point for “complete.” 

Once you’ve decided that there is something to be 
changed and a mold to fill, you ask yourself, “How do I now 
make this happen?” and/or “What resources do I need to 
allocate to make it happen?” (“What’s the next action?”) 

By this point you’ve probably noticed that Getting Things 
Done is not some new technology or invention—it simply 
makes explicit the principles at work within what we all do 
implicitly. But with that awareness, you can then leverage 
those principles consciously to create more elegant results. 


Life affords no higher pleasure than that of surmounting difficulties, 
passing from one step of success to another, forming new wishes, and 
seeing them gratified. 


—Dr. Samuel Johnson 


Your life and work are made up of outcomes and actions 
that you engage in more or less consciously. Whether they 


are merely less-than-conscious responses to your 
environment or more conscious results of your directed 
focus is the choice you will always have. If you have any 
intention to expand your experiences and expressions 
beyond simply being at the mercy of the world as it comes 
at you, the opportunity is there to recognize, develop, and 
master the art of getting things done. The challenge will 
continually be to apply the two essential elements of this 
art: defining what done means and what doing looks like. 
This is not always that easy, especially when dealing with 
some of the more subtle and sublime areas of your life 
experience; but without challenges, you would never learn 
or grow. 


Wisdom consists not so much in knowing what to do in the ultimate as 
in knowing what to do next. 


—Herbert Hoover 


The good news is that when your operational behavior is 
grooved to engage with everything that comes your way, at 
all levels, based upon those dynamics, a deep alignment 
occurs, and wondrous things emerge. You become highly 
productive. You make things up, and you make them 
happen. 


The Magic of Mastering the Mundane 


People often wonder how I can sit with them at their desks, 
often for hours on end, as they empty their drawers, unpack 
all their unprocessed e-mails, and painstakingly go through 
the minutiae of stuff that they have let accumulate in their 
minds and their physical and virtual spaces. Aside from the 
common embarrassment they feel about the volume of their 


irresponsibly dealt-with details, they assume I should be 
bored to tears. Quite the contrary. Much to my own 
surprise, I find it to be some of the most engaging work I do 
with people. I know the release and relief and freedom that 
sit on the other side of dealing with these things effectively. 
I know that we all need practice and support and a strong, 
clear focus to get through them, until we have the built-in 
standards and behaviors we need to engage with them as 
they demand. Every time I notice a client identifying 
something in his environment or mind that is pulling on him 
and in a few moments he processes it to silence, I know he’s 
deepening a critically important pattern of behavior. And I 
know how significant a change these people may then 
experience in their relationships with their bosses, their 
partners, their spouses, their kids, and themselves over the 
next few hours and (we hope) days and years. 

It’s not boring. It’s some of the best work I do. 


Multilevel Outcome Management 


The challenge is to marry high-level idealistic focus to the mundane 
activity of life. In the end they require the same thinking. 


I’m in the focus business. As a consultant, coach, and 
educator I ask simple questions that often elicit very 
creative and intelligent responses from others (and even 
myself!), which in turn add value to the situation and work 
at hand. People aren’t any smarter after these sessions than 
they were before—they just direct and utilize their 
intelligence more productively. 


An idealist believes that the short run doesn’t count. A cynic believes 
the long run doesn’t matter. A realist believes that what is done or left 
undone in the short run determines the long run. 


—Sydney J. Harris 


What’s unique about the practical focus of GTD is the 
combination of effectiveness and efficiency that these 
methods can bring to every level of your reality. There are 
lots of inspirational sources for the high-level “purpose, 
values, vision” kind of thinking, and many more mundane 
tools for getting hold of smaller details such as phone 
numbers and appointments and grocery lists. The world has 
been rather barren, however, of practices that relate 
equally to both levels and tie them together. 

“What does this mean to me?” “What do I want to be 
true about it?” “What’s the next step required to make that 
happen?” These are the cornerstone questions we must 
answer, at some point, about everything. This thinking, and 
the tools that support it, will serve you in ways you may not 
yet imagine. 


The Power of Natural Planning 


The value of natural project planning is that it provides an 
integrated, flexible, aligned way to think through any 
situation. Whereas the basic five-step process of capturing, 
clarifying, organizing, reflecting, and engaging is a 
coherent way to achieve stability across the whole spectrum 
of your life, natural planning produces relaxed, focused 
control in more specific areas. 

Challenging the purpose of anything you may be doing is 
healthy and mature. Being comfortable making up visions of 
success, before the methods are clear, is a phenomenal trait 


to strengthen. Being willing to have ideas, good or bad, and 
to express and capture all of them without judgment is 
critical for fully accessing creative intelligence. Honing 
multiple ideas and types of information into components, 
sequences, and priorities aimed toward a specific outcome 
is a necessary mental discipline. And deciding on and taking 
real next actions—actually moving on something in the 
physical world—is the essence of productivity. 


I respect the man who knows distinctly what he wishes. The greater 
part of all mischief in the world arises from the fact that men do not 
sufficiently understand their own aims. They have undertaken to build 
a tower, and spend no more labor on the foundation than would be 
necessary to erect a hut. 


—Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 


Being able to bring all these ingredients together, with 
appropriate timing and balance, is perhaps the major 
component of competence for this new millennium. But it’s 
not yet the norm of much professional and personal 
behavior; far from it. It’s still a daunting task to apply this 
awareness to all the aspects of one’s life. The natural 
planning model is natural, but in many cases it is not 
automatic. 

But even when only portions of the model are inserted, 
tremendous benefit ensues. The feedback I’ve gotten over 
the years with this model has continued to validate that 
even the slightest increase in the use of natural planning 
can bring significant improvement. To see brainstorming 
about almost every aspect of their lives becoming a 
standard for so many people is terrific. To hear from 
executives who have used the model as a way to frame key 
meetings and discussions and have gotten great value from 
doing so is gratifying. It all just affirms that the way our 


minds naturally work is what we should focus on to make 
anything happen in the physical world. 

The model is simply the basic principle of determining 
outcomes and actions for everything we consider to be our 
work. When those two key focus points become the norm in 
our day-to-day lives, the baseline for productivity moves to 
another level. The addition of brainstorming—the most 
creative means of expressing and capturing ideas, 
perspectives, and details about projects—makes for an 
elegant set of behaviors for staying relaxed and getting 
things done. 


Shifting to a Positive Organizational 
Culture 


It doesn’t take a big change to increase the productivity 
standards of a group. I continually get feedback indicating 
that with a little implementation by a few key people, 
immediately things start to happen more quickly and more 
easily. 

The constructive evaluation of activities, asset 
allocations, communications, policies, and procedures 
against purposes and intended outcomes has become 
increasingly critical for every organization I know of. The 
challenges to our companies continue to mount, with 
pressures coming these days from globalization, 
competition, technology, shifting markets, erratic economic 
swings, and raised standards of performance and 
production, making outcome/action thinking a required 
twenty-first-century behavior. 

“What do you want to have happen in this meeting?” 
“What is the purpose of this form?” “What would the ideal 
person for this job be able to do?” “What do we want to 
accomplish with this software?” These and a multitude of 


other, similar questions are still sorely lacking in many 
quarters. There’s plenty of talk in the big meetings that 
sounds good, but learning to ask, “Why are we doing this?” 
and “What will it look like when it’s done successfully?” and 
to apply the answers at the day-to-day, operational level— 
that will create profound results. 

Commonly the productivity issues expressed at senior 
levels in companies we work with are centered around e- 
mail and meetings—too many of both, and too much time 
having to be spent dealing with seemingly nonstrategic 
stuff within them. It is very easy for these communication 
media to morph into an unproductive maelstrom, draining 
energy. Unfocused meetings lead to unnecessary e-mails, 
which then produce the need for clarifying meetings, which 
produce more e-mail, and so on. Both e-mail and meetings 
are critical to organizational life, but too often they fall into 
the category of necessary evils, primarily because there is a 
lack of rigor relative to their purposes and desired 
outcomes. 


A vision without a task is but a dream; a task without a vision is but 
drudgery; a vision and a task is the hope of the world. 


—From a church in Sussex, England, ca. 1730 


Empowerment naturally ensues for individuals as they 
move from complaining and victim modalities into outcomes 
and actions defined for direction. When that becomes the 
standard in a group, it creates significant improvement in 
the atmosphere as well as in the output. There are enough 
other problems and opportunities to be concerned with; 
negativity and passive resistance need to continually give 
way to a focus on the desired results at the appropriate 
horizons. 


The microcosm of how people deal with their in-trays, e- 
mail, and the conversation with others will be reflected in 
the macro-reality of their culture and organization. If balls 
are dropped, if decisions about what to do are resisted on 
the front end, if not all the open loops are managed 
responsibly, that will be magnified in the group, and the 
culture will sustain a stressful fire-and-crisis siege 
mentality. If, in contrast, individuals are implementing the 
principles of Getting Things Done, the culture will expect 
and experience a new standard of high performance. 
Problems and conflicts will not go away—they remain 
inherent as you attempt to change (or maintain) anything in 
this world. The operational behaviors of this book, however, 
will provide the focus and framework for addressing them 
in the most productive way. 

I am often asked, “How can this methodology improve an 
organization?” In fact, all the principles I’ve put forward 
are as applicable to an enterprise as they are to an 
individual. Capturing what has a group’s attention, getting 
clarity about the inherent outcomes desired and actions 
required, regularly reviewing status and incorporating new 
realities, and consistently recalibrating and reallocating 
resources—all are core best practices for any team or 
company. But just like you can’t teach an organization to 
read, you can’t expect to “improve an organization,” per se, 
with Getting Things Done. To function at all in a knowledge 
economy, most organizations need people who read; the 
culture can provide training and support to ensure that 
occurs. They will also need people who have mastered the 
art of effectively getting things done, to operate at the new 
levels being demanded in this century. When that is 
manifest in a company through its expectations, training, 
and modeling, from the top down, the results in 
organizational output can be profound. 


GTD and Cognitive Science 


SINCE THE First ECition of Getting Things Done was published, 
significant research in the field of social and cognitive 
psychology has documented and validated the efficacy of 
the principles that underlie the methodology. Until recently 
these practices could be confirmed only experientially and 
anecdotally. Anyone who had ever applied the GTD 
techniques of capturing, clarifying, organizing, and 
reflecting on the resulting inventory acknowledged the 
same results: greater clarity, control, and focus, along with 
all the resulting personal and organizational benefits 
associated with that experience. If you have to any degree 
begun to implement the practices I have put forward so far, 
you will no doubt have noticed some positive increase in 
your own demeanor. 

Rigorous studies compiled by experts in the field of 
cognitive science, ranging from personal to organizational 
aspects, have begun to provide data that gives foundational 
support to this methodology and why and how its 
improvements are produced. In some sense this may seem 
like someone’s proving that gravity exists after we’ve all 
been experiencing it and dealing with it since we were 
conscious. But from another perspective it gives perhaps 
needed credence to the advice for mastering workflow I’ve 
put forward here, and to why such seemingly simple 
processes and behaviors described in Getting Things Done 
have such a compelling result. 


The supporting research has emerged within several 
frameworks and categories: 


Positive psychology 

Distributed cognition: the value of an external mind 
Relieving the cognitive load of incompletions 

Flow theory 

Self-leadership theory 

Goal-striving via implementation intentions 
Psychological capital (PsyCap) 


GTD and Positive Psychology 


In 2000 Martin Seligman took on the presidency of the 
American Psychological Association. For his presidential 
address he challenged the profession to shift its focus away 
from simply describing, studying, and diagnosing the 
negative aspects of the human condition and to begin 
devoting more attention to the positive aspects of what it 
means to be human. Of course, his message was simply a 
more mainstream embodiment of Abraham Maslow’s ideas 
from the mid-twentieth century of personal fulfillment as 
the richest arena of psychology. But since Seligman’s call to 
action, positive psychology has blossomed into a full-fledged 
component of the field. 

The research generated by this change in perspective 
has been conducted at both the basic and applied levels. It 
has added to our understanding of a myriad of 
psychological constructs and has been used to improve the 
lives of many. Positive psychology is a vast discipline, but a 
sampling of its relevant aspects includes happiness, 
psychological well-being, flow/optimal experience, meaning, 
passion, purpose, authentic leadership, strengths, values, 
character, and virtue. Graduate education programs in 


these areas have emerged across the world and continue to 
expand. 

How is this relevant to Getting Things Done? GTD is 
more than just a way to manage tasks and projects. In many 
respects it is more concerned with fundamental issues of 
meaningful work, mindful living, and psychological well- 
being than simply offering methods for being more efficient 
or productive for their own sake. The emphasis (and 
requirement) of outcome thinking concerning the stuff we 
encounter, as well as achieving a functional way to capture, 
clarify, organize, and assess the results so we can think 
more clearly, describes the core practices that truly make 
the actual experience of life better. 

That said (and experienced, if you have!), it is still quite 
interesting to examine some of the various theories and 
studies that have focused on the more specific aspects of 
the relationship of our psyche, our well-being, and our 
performance—all with close correlation to the principles 
and practices of Getting Things Done. 


Distributed Cognition: The Value of an 
External Mind 


Your mind is for having ideas, not for holding them. 


In 2008 a fascinating paper, “Getting Things Done: The 
Science Behind Stress-Free Productivity,” was published in 
a professional journal by two researchers in Belgium who 
analyzed my methodology specifically from the perspective 
of verifiable data and working theories from cognitive 
science.* Their brilliant and detailed assessments and 
conclusions extend far beyond what I can do justice to here 
(the paper is worthy of multiple reads), but suffice it to say 


that its thesis is profound: your mind is designed to have 
ideas, based upon pattern detection, but it isn’t designed to 
remember much of anything! 

Because of the way the mind developed, it is brilliant at 
recognition, but terrible at recall. You can glance at today’s 
calendar and in the course of a few seconds get a coherent 
sense of the day and its contents and contexts. But you’d 
have a terrible time trying to recall the contents of the next 
fourteen days on your calendar merely from memory. 

A wonderful exposition of the new discoveries in the 
science of cognition, related to our limited capacity to 
manage and maintain awareness of relevant data in the 
information age, and the necessity of building and utilizing 
an “external brain,” was put forward by Daniel Levitin in his 
book The Organized Mind.* 

The bottom line is that when you use your memory as 
your organizing system (as most everyone on the planet still 
does, for most of what they’re doing to manage their lives), 
your mind will effectively become overwhelmed and 
incompetent, because you are demanding of it intense work 
for which it is not well equipped. 

If, however, you are able to bring its attention to bear 
appropriately and efficiently to create the optimal triggers 
for later thinking and action (such as reading an e-mail, 
then setting a meeting on your calendar to deal with its 
issue or opportunity), then it gets to relax and rely on the 
automatic and elegant thinking it can do when presented 
specific things on which to focus, in the proper context. You 
trust you'll see that meeting on your calendar sufficiently in 
advance to be prepared for it. 

GTD provides the methodology for identifying those 
things that need focused attention, applying it efficiently on 
the front end and organizing the triggers for appropriate 
thinking at the right time. The Belgian researchers crafted 
an elegant exposition of the science behind efficiently 


maximizing what our minds are good for and what they’re 
not, creating a framework for how we can more effectively 
produce profound results with minimal thinking!* 


Relieving the Cognitive Load of 
Incompletions 


Much fruitful work has been done in the early part of this 
century by Dr. Roy Baumeister et al. in determining the 
effects on consciousness of unfinished items—goals, 
projects, outcomes, etc.—that have been committed to but 
not yet completed. His conclusions simply verify what I’ve 
experienced for decades: uncompleted tasks take up room 
in the mind, which then limits clarity and focus.~ 

But interestingly, in alignment with the GTD practices, 
Baumeister has also proven that completion of such items is 
not required to relieve that burden on the psyche. What is 
needed is a trusted plan that ensures forward engagement 
will happen.- 

In Baumeister’s model merely determining the next 
action to fulfill a commitment is a sufficient end result of 
“planning”—as long as the trigger or reminder is parked in 
a place that we trust we’ll look within a reasonable amount 
of time. My thinking and model were heavily cited in his 
wonderful book Willpower, which positions them within a 
rich context of managing the mental “muscle” we must 
continually employ, especially in knowledge work. 


Flow Theory 


One of the more popular concepts in this field, which has 
often been associated with GTD, has been the idea of 
“flow”—the state of optimal performance and engagement. 


Flow is what the athletes refer to as being “in the zone,” 
and it can be closely correlated with the idea of “mind like 
water,” which I introduced in the first chapter. 

The flow experience is marked by various distinct 
components, several of which are already implemented by 
the GTD approach. To experience flow, it is necessary that 
your skills in a given task match the challenge at hand. If 
the challenge exceeds your requisite skill level, you will 
experience anxiety, and if your skills exceed the challenge, 
you will most likely feel bored during the activity.* Flow is 
usually accompanied by complete concentration on the 
given task, and you typically feel in control and have clear 
goals in sight. Individuals in flow generally have an idea of 
what is coming next and receive immediate feedback 
throughout the task. They also experience a merging of 
action and awareness, during which they lose both their 
self-consciousness and their sense of time. They are usually 
intrinsically motivated, performing an activity for its own 
sake and not for an external reward. Those in flow often are 
performing at an optimal level and are completely absorbed 
in what they are doing. Once individuals have experienced 
flow, they are often compelled to repeat the activities that 
enabled them to experience it. 


You can only put your conscious attention on one thing at a time. If 
that’s all that has your attention, you’re in flow. 


While flow was originally conceptualized by investigating 
leisure activities (e.g., rock climbing, painting), 
Csikszentmihalyi and LeFevre* found that individuals are 
engaged in high-skill, high-challenge activities more often 
at work (54 percent) than at leisure (18 percent). 
Csikszentmihalyi explained that many jobs inherently 
contain the type of goals and feedback structures that 


would allow one to experience flow at work, a phenomenon 
that is associated with higher levels of subjective well- 
being.— 

The GTD approach includes several conditions of the flow 
experience—namely, having clear goals and receiving 
feedback. GTD’s emphasis on focusing attention on one task 
at a time is closely associated with the crux of the flow 
experience: being completely absorbed in a singular 
activity, in which one’s stimulus field is limited. Adopting 
GTD enables individuals to find flow more easily in their 
work and personal lives. By getting tasks out of the mind 
and into an external system, they can more easily see and 
track progress, which is a form of feedback. Having a 
complete picture of one’s commitments in work and life can 
help individuals make better decisions about what to pay 
attention to in any given moment, which, in turn, will allow 
them to engage more fully in the task at hand, making flow 
a more likely outcome. 


Self-Leadership Theory 


Selfleadership can be traced back to the mid-1980s as an 
expansion of the concept of selfmanagement. According to 
Neck and Manz,* self-leadership is a process through which 
individuals control their own behavior, influencing 
themselves through the use of specific behavioral and 
cognitive strategies. The popularity of self-leadership has 
soared via a large number of practitioner-oriented books, 
theoretical and empirical journal publications, inclusion in 
management and leadership textbooks, and the growth of 
self-leadership training programs. 

The strategies that comprise self-leadership are 
commonly separated into three categories: behavior- 
focused, natural reward, and constructive thought pattern. 


Behavior-focused strategies are usually centered on 
raising individual self-awareness with the goal of facilitating 
behavioral management. In the context of work, these 
strategies commonly place an emphasis on doing necessary 
but unpleasant tasks. This family of strategies includes self 
observation, self-goal setting, self-reward, self-punishment, 
and self-cuing. 

Natural reward strategies are intended to create 
situations in which an individual is motivated or rewarded 
by the activity itself. These strategies revolve around 
reshaping unpleasant tasks or activities to make them more 
enjoyable and deliberately focusing attention on the 
inherently rewarding aspects of the activities. 


Providing yourself the right cues, which you will notice at the right 
time, about the right things, is a core practice of stress-free 
productivity. 


Constructive thought pattern strategies relate 
specifically to creating ways of thinking that can positively 
impact performance. Examples of these strategies include 
self-talk, mental imagery, and replacing dysfunctional 
beliefs and assumptions. 

There are aspects of GTD that connect to each of the 
three overall types of self-leadership. One of the most 
evident is the concept of self-cuing. A well-constructed GTD 
system provides for a physical artifact that spurs future 
action. The GTD methodology also embodies the component 
of natural reward strategies. There is a sense of pleasure in 
identifying small yet annoying tasks and taking care of them 
—something a thorough mental RAM dump and some free 
time certainly make possible. Finally, a key element of GTD 
is the mental component of thinking of your work not simply 
as a series of large projects but more directly as concrete 
next actions. This shift from a defeatist/overwhelmed 


attitude to the motivational state that enables you to move 
forward on such tasks is a great example of shifting your 
mind-set in a positive way. 

Using self-leadership strategies has been shown to 
improve people’s sense of self-efficacy, and self-efficacy is 
one of the most well-researched constructs when it comes 
to organizational psychology. It has been connected to job 
satisfaction, job performance, and other positive 
organizational behaviors for both traditional employees and 
entrepreneurs. 


Goal-Striving/Attainment Via 
Implementation Intentions 


Goals (desired outcomes) are a vital part of life, and GTD 
can serve to facilitate both personal and professional goals. 
Gollwitzer and Oettingen have conducted a major line of 
research on goal achievement, incorporating the idea of 
“implementation intentions.”* In a nutshell they argue that 
the best way to ensure goal striving (taking actions toward 
a stated goal) is to create a cause-and-effect link in your 
mind about when certain goal-relevant actions will be 
taken. When you make plans (implementation intentions) 
ahead of time and decide what actions will be carried out in 
which contexts, the proper behavior is nearly automatically 
enacted instead of being drawn from your limited reserve of 
willpower. In other words, if you can trust that something 
you will more or less do automatically will provide sufficient 
direction and juice to move you toward your outcome, you'll 
have that juice when needed. It won’t be depleted by your 
constant worrying or thinking about what you should do 
and when. 

GTD and implementation intentions are linked through 
using the system as the trigger or prompt for taking 
outcome-directed action. For example, you could set the 


implementation intention, “When I’m in my office with more 
than an hour of free time and a high level of energy, I'll look 
at my task list and select something challenging and 
important to work on.” Or, “When it is Sunday afternoon I 
will conduct a Weekly Review.” Or, “When I’m feeling 
flustered and overwhelmed I’ll do a mental RAM dump.” 
The number of such possible implementation intentions is 
truly endless. 


Psychological Capital (PsyCap) 


Psychological capital (PsyCap) is a relatively new framework 
within which organizational psychologists are beginning to 
evaluate the overall resourceful state of workers and its 
effect. It consists of four definable aspects: self-efficacy, 
optimism, resilience, and hope. 


e Self-efficacy is the confidence to take on and devote the 
necessary effort to succeed at challenging tasks. 

e Optimism involves making positive attributions about 
succeeding now and in the future. 

e Hope means persevering toward goals and, when 
necessary, redirecting paths to those goals. 

e Resilience involves bouncing back to an original—or 
even better—state of being after facing adversity and 
problems. 


Individually each of these variables can predict various 
outcomes to a certain degree. For example, someone’s 
degree of optimism can correlate statistically with 
particular results or behaviors. However, when these four 
components are considered together in what psychologists 
now Call PsyCap, you can predict much more than merely 
the sum of the effects of its component elements. In its 


relatively short history as a construct, PsyCap has been 
connected to many positive individual and organizational 
outcomes, such as job performance*: * and psychological 
well-being.~ 

PsyCap is more of a description of a state than a trait 
itself—that is, it is something that can change or be 
changed, developed, or undermined, almost minute to 
minute, as in the example of one’s mood. In familiar terms it 
would reflect the difference between your experiencing a 
good day or a bad day. Are you feeling on top of your game, 
or buried by it? The good news is that such states are 
malleable—you can do things that can change and improve 
them without having to change some inherent aspect of 
yourself. 

Getting Things Done relates directly to all four 
ingredients of a high PsyCap and its intended results. By 
enabling people to create and maintain a complete picture 
of their commitments to themselves and others in order to 
make good decisions about what to do (or not do) at any 
given moment, it automatically builds a sense of confidence 
and control (self-efficacy). Simply identifying all open loops 
and moving them from memory to an external mind while 
systematically identifying concrete and doable next actions 
is a pure exercise in self-control and directedness. An 
individual utilizing GTD knows exactly what needs to be 
done and exactly what action he can take to achieve it, 
given the restrictions of available time, energy, and 
contextual restraints. 

Adopting GTD sets people up for greater optimism 
because it enables them to draw connections between the 
successful completion of projects and their own purposeful 
and goal-directed efforts. Individuals identify meaningful 
projects, articulate the next steps needed to complete them, 
and then ideally follow through the process until the project 


is completed. As each “win” is achieved, it produces greater 
capacity for making more positive commitments. 

In addition, the focus on front-end decision making in 
GTD—doing “the work to define the work”—can be viewed 
as an exercise in both aspects of hope (setting goals and 
identifying pathways to those goals). Individuals set goals 
(“What does ‘done’ look like?”) and identify the tasks 
needed to achieve those goals (“What’s the next action?”) 
during this front-end decision-making process. 

While no empirical data yet exists for the idea that those 
individuals who utilize GTD are more successful in 
recovering from failure (resilience), it’s certainly been 
validated anecdotally for me from scores of the best and 
brightest individuals on the planet. Dealing with serious 
family emergencies or tumultuous changes in their jobs and 
careers, people have provided abundant testimonials to 
attest to their retained sanity, stability, and productivity by 
utilizing GTD practices. The methodology gives an 
individual a sense of calm and control over a difficult 
situation that allows them to use their mental faculties to 
address the task at hand and recalibrate multiple vectors in 
real time, as needed. In a time of stress or other adversity, 
those individuals who are able to think most clearly and 
process the results more efficiently will be more likely to 
emerge from the stress in better shape than those who do 
not. 

The PsyCap model also provides a framework within 
which to understand why groups who have integrated GTD 
as a cultural standard experience a significant degree of 
“moving up the food chain,” relative to how their 
organization responds, interacts, and produces results. 
Whether or not PsyCap develops further as a definable, 
verifiable, and developmental arena in organizational 
psychology, it’s a great way to describe the mental, 
emotional, reflective, and even physical benefits of what you 
get from using GTD. 


Undoubtedly during the coming years we will see a 
continual stream of new scientific data that will validate 
what I’ve known was true from day one of my experience 
with this model, and what has been shared by countless 
others: when all of our potentially meaningful things are 
captured, clarified, organized, and reflected upon, the more 
mature, elegant, and intelligent part of who we really are 
can show up at the table. That produces experiences and 
results that can’t be beat. 


The Path of GTD Mastery 


eto is actuary a lifelong practice with multiple levels of 
mastery. It is very similar to playing an instrument like the 
violin, a sport like tennis, or a game like chess. It’s like 
mathematics, pottery, art history, or even parenting. All of 
these endeavors involve learning and applying a particular 
set of moves and techniques, and there’s no end to how 
good you can become at them, or how many subtleties 
there are to explore. 

GTD is the art of dealing with the stream of life’s work 
and engagements, which itself is constantly evolving for all 
of us, at any age or station. It’s about identifying and 
navigating your commitments and interests from a state of 
confidence and flow. Your work and focus will change, often 
dramatically, over time. But engaging with all of it 
masterfully is a defined practice that can be learned and 
refined over a lifetime. 

Mastery does not refer to some final end state of a Zen- 
like peacefulness and enlightenment on a mountaintop 
(though that could be an optional nice expression of it). 
Rather, it’s the demonstrated ability to consistently engage 
in productive behaviors as a means to achieve clarity, 
stability, and focus when it’s desired or required—no matter 
what the challenge. 

How well you have developed that ability will be tested 
when you’re confronted with things that are unclear, 
unstable, and distracting, which are natural and normal 


symptoms of any change in your world. The idea of “mind 
like water” doesn’t assume that water is always 
undisturbed. On the contrary, water engages appropriately 
with disturbance, instead of fighting against it. Over the 
course of life such disturbances can range from dealing 
with your homework in the sixth grade to the demands of 
your new job to the vague sense of uneasiness about what 
to do when you retire. 

GTD mastery involves learning and incorporating its 
various best practices, and then integrating them ina 
holistic manner, which results in a much more dynamic 
experience than simply the sum of its parts. When you learn 
to play tennis, you focus on specific components of its 
moves, like the backhand, the forehand, the lob, and the 
serve. When you actually play a game of tennis, you then 
put them all together. As you increase your mastery, your 
focus matures to encompass an overall strategy. Similarly, 
mastering GTD involves an initial mastery of its segments, 
techniques, and tools and then incorporating them as you 
play your whole life and work game. Your expertise will be 
reflected in your using an optimally integrated system and 
approach, without thinking about it. 


The Three Tiers of Mastery 


Over the many years of engaging with people who have 
adopted the GTD methodology, I have noticed generally 
three stages of maturity they have demonstrated in using 
the model: 


1 | Employing the fundamentals of managing workflow; 
2 | Implementing a more elevated and integrated total 
life management system; and 


3 | Leveraging skills to create clear space and get things 
done for an ever-expansive expression and 
manifestation. 


A good analogy here is the experience of learning to 
drive a car. The first stage is getting the basics under 
control, so that you can handle the machine without hurting 
yourself or anyone else. The moves feel awkward and often 
counterintuitive. But once you’re good enough to get your 
license, your world changes dramatically for the better, 
because now you can go places and do things that you 
couldn’t previously. Then there comes a time when you are 
able to drive down a road without actually thinking about 
the act of driving—it’s become an almost automatic part of 
your life. And finally, you decide to graduate to a really high- 
performance vehicle, in which the prime challenge and 
opportunity is how well you can focus ahead, making 
yourself essentially one with your vehicle, experiencing 
elevated levels of satisfaction and fulfillment with driving. 

Each of those stages is represented by the horizons of 
your focus and the application of specific techniques. At first 
you’re making what look like small, jerky movements but 
what are actually very smooth movements focused on very 
short horizons. Then, as you gain comfort and familiarity 
with the process, you extend your focus to the next street 
corner or freeway exit. Then you can graduate to a more 
conscious and directed focus at multiple horizons, driving 
across town with total situational awareness. Similarly, as 
the techniques of Getting Things Done become increasingly 
second nature, you shift your attention from the mechanics 
of your system to the results it produces. 


Mastering the Basics 


As simple as they may seem at first, building proficiency 
with the fundamental components of Getting Things Done— 
the basics—can take a while. Though it’s easy to understand 
and agree with its concepts and principles, putting them 
fully into practice is not necessarily a smooth or automatic 
process. It’s the same as with any sophisticated practice— 
driving a car, throwing a karate punch, or playing the flute 
—the beginning moves are not familiar or comfortable. 
Once you’ve done them a thousand times, however, you can 
manifest elegance, power, and fluidity that would be 
inaccessible any other way. The same may be true for you 
about learning GTD. 

For example, capturing everything potentially 
meaningful into trusted external buckets, so that nothing 
remains rattling around in your head, is a behavior that can 
be as daunting to employ as learning to manually shift 
easily in a car. As with most aspects of the GTD model, 
writing things down is itself not a new skill, but rather a 
practice that can easily seem unworthy of the effort, if not 
downright counterintuitive. (“If it’s not immediately 
important, why should I bother?”) Becoming sensitized to 
the need to externalize those kinds of thoughts as well as 
building the habit to actually carry out the necessary 
actions with a ubiquitous tool at hand, without exception, is 
the real challenge. 

Other basic practices, which, even if implemented 
initially, easily regress into incomplete, out-of-date, and 
therefore dysfunctional usage, include: 


e Avoiding next-action decision making on “stuff to do” 

e Fully utilizing the “Waiting For” category, such that 
every expected deliverable from others is inventoried 
and reviewed for follow-up in adequate timing 

e Using Agenda lists to capture and manage 
communications with others 


e Keeping a simple, easily accessible filing and reference 
system 

e Keeping the calendar as pure “hard landscape” without 
undermining its trustworthiness with extraneous inputs 

e Doing Weekly Reviews to keep one’s system functional 
and current 


It’s Easy to Get Off Track... 


If you are sincere about implementing Getting Things Done, 
it’s actually not that difficult to get started, as I’ve tried to 
assure you with the instructions given in the earlier 
sections of the book. At some point, though, the rest of your 
reality will inevitably come flooding at you full force, and if 
the new practices haven’t yet had time to root themselves 
in your behavior patterns, it’s relatively easy to get blown 
off course. 

Most people are so used to keeping things in their heads 
that it’s very easy to slip back into that familiar pattern. 
Deciding next actions requires a thrust of cognitive effort 
that seductively can be avoided if a particular situation is 
not in some critical mode. Making time for the Weekly 
Review, if it’s not been instituted as a habit, can bea 
daunting challenge. All of that begins to result in a personal 
system that is incomplete and out of date—you’ll no longer 
be able to trust your lists to give you the whole picture, and 
because the system is not really relieving pressure, you'll 
conclude it’s not worth keeping up with anymore, and you 
might as well take it back into your head. In those 
circumstances it’s not uncommon for someone to wander 
off the track exponentially quickly. 


. . . and Easy to Get Back On 


The good news is that it’s as easy to get back into your 
productive groove as it may have been to get knocked out 
of it. It simply requires revisiting the basics: get a pen and 
paper and empty your head again; clean up your lists of 
actions and projects; identify and add new projects and 
next actions to bring your lists current; clean up what’s 
leaked outside your system. 

This cycle of getting off track and getting back on again 
happens to almost everyone—particularly during this first 
level of mastering the basics of the game. In my experience 
it can easily take as long as two years to finally get this 
stage of practice fully integrated into one’s life and work 
style, and consistently maintained. 

Another piece of good news is that even if a person has 
gleaned only a few concepts from this material, or has not 
implemented the system regularly, it can bring marked 
improvement. If you “get” nothing more than the two- 
minute rule, it will be worth its weight in gold. If you just 
write down a few more things on your mind than you would 
have previously, you'll sleep better. If you clean up e-mail to 
zero at least every once in a while, you will have great 
cause for celebration. And if you simply ask, “What’s the 
next action?” of yourself or anyone else when you might not 
have otherwise, it will add to your stress-free productivity. 

Of course, the more those techniques begin to work 
together as a whole, systematically and consistently, the 
more dramatic will be the increase in the experience of 
relaxed, focused control. Mastering the basics is 
transformative for most everyone who achieves it. If you 
reach that stage, you will be getting many more things 
done, more quickly and more easily, and operating with 
greatly increased confidence in how you’re dealing with the 
operational details of life. At this first tier of GTD mastery 
you will be generally keeping yourself under control and 
focused on an hour-by-hour, day-by-day basis. 


Graduate Level—Integrated Life 
Management 


At this point, you are ready to graduate to the next level— 
having your hand on the helm of your life on a week-to- 
week, month-to-month (and even longer) basis. This 
requires a more subtle level of awareness and practice. As I 
mentioned earlier, as you get better at driving a car, you are 
able to extend your horizon, which creates smoother moves, 
and you can focus more on where you’re going than on the 
mechanism that’s getting you there. Similarly, when you 
reach a certain level of maturity with the GTD process, you 
won’t be as focused on the system itself or how you’re 
working it, but will utilize it in more flexible, customized 
ways, as your trusted tool to facilitate control and focus 
over longer and larger spans. 

Whereas the first level of mastery involves in-trays, 
meetings, e-mail, phone calls, agendas, waiting-fors, 
reference systems, list management, getting the right tools, 
etc., this next tier is concerned with getting rigorous with 
the bigger issues that are driving the contents of the basic 
level. These specific actions and information exist because 
of their relevance to things larger than themselves—the 
projects we have to complete, the problems we need to 
solve, the areas of focus and interest we have in our 
complex lives. Why are you getting that e-mail? What’s the 
purpose of that meeting, and why do you have to attend? 
What’s coming up next quarter that you need to start 
dealing with now? What “projects” need to become 
“someday/maybes,” and vice versa, because of some of the 
larger changes going on? 

Mastery of the fundamentals, which provides the basics 
of effective and efficient execution, also provides the ability 
and room to address a higher level of control and focus— 
projects, and how they are identified, managed, and 


understood in relation to one another and to the larger 
frameworks within which we operate. Developing comfort 
with an external mind frees up and leverages one’s 
cognitive abilities, paving the way for many more creative 
and productive uses of an integrated self-management 
system. 

The hallmarks of this next level of maturity with Getting 
Things Done are: 


e a complete, current, and clear inventory of projects; 

e a working map of one’s roles, accountabilities, and 
interests—personally and professionally; 

e an integrated total life management system, custom 
tailored to one’s current needs and direction and 
utilized to dynamically steer out beyond the day-to-day; 
and 

e challenges and surprises trigger your utilization of this 
methodology instead of throwing you out of it. 


When Projects Become the Heartbeat of Your 
Operational System 


Further down the path of mastering this methodology you 
will reach a stage at which your Projects list becomes more 
the driver, rather than a reflection, of your Next Action lists, 
and your projects themselves will become a truer reflection 
of your roles, areas of focus, and interests. At this point the 
center of gravity of your selfmanagement system will have 
moved from the Ground-level horizon to somewhere 
between Horizon 1 and Horizon 2 (refer to page _55 in 
chapter 2). 

Though it is central to an ongoing experience of stress- 
free productivity, very few people—even among those who 
have been engaged with Getting Things Done for years— 
actually walk around with a complete inventory of their 


projects, objectively and regularly reviewed. Those who do 
reach this level, however, and come to realize its power, 
make that the principle list from which they navigate. 
Given my broad definition of project (any outcome 
requiring more than one step that you’re committed to 
achieve within a year), it might be challenging enough for 
you to delineate all of those, even if they are clear (“Get 
new tires,” “Fix the printer,” “Find a new babysitter,” etc.). 
But the real expression of maturity here is the inclusion of 
the more subtle desired outcomes definable as doable 
events (“Clarify Frank’s new role on the team,” “Research 
options for improving Bettina’s math grades,” “Resolve 
property boundary issue with neighbor,” etc.). A signpost of 
GTD mastery at this stage—and, indeed, life mastery! —is 
when one recognizes anything that has his or her attention 
(concerns, worries, problems, issues, tensions) and 
translates them into achievable outcomes (projects), to be 
executed with concrete next actions. Most people resist 
acknowledging issues and opportunities until they know 
they can be handled successfully, not realizing that 
exploring, looking into, or in some way accepting or putting 
something to bed because there is no solution is an 
appropriate outcome (project) itself. The ability to create 
appropriate engagement with your neighbor’s boundary 
issue, your daughter’s math grades, or the role of a new 
team member—no matter how ambiguous or unclear the 
actual path for achieving each may be—by identifying the 
inherent project and taking steps to resolve it is quite an 
extraordinary and mature self-management practice. 


Assessing and Populating Your Projects List from 
Your Areas of Focus 


Everything we do is serving some aspect of the roles and 
accountabilities we have taken on or an area of interest and 


engagement in our lives. I call my brother just to check in 
and say hello because “family relationships” has meaning 
for me. I buy groceries because I consider “health and 
vitality” important. I produce an agenda for a board 
meeting because I need to maintain “corporate oversight 
in my role in my company. 

Whenever people actually produce a checklist for this 
horizon—the areas of professional and personal focus they 
can identify—they invariably realize that there are more 
projects they need to add. They will also usually realize that 
they have not been paying appropriate attention to some 
aspect of either their work or their personal life, or both, 
and they are motivated to bring more balance and 
wholeness to their Projects list. 


yw 


An Integrated Total Life-Management System 


The third aspect of this stage of mastery is that your system 
will have become not just a conglomeration of various lists, 
information, applications, and tools but rather a cohesive 
“control room” with all its components working together to 
engage effectively with whatever circumstance arises. You 
will have attained the ability to customize your lists and 
categories, and how you use them, in response to changes 
in your world and your own increasing sophistication with 
the possibilities. 

This is a reflection of a functional awareness of GTD. You 
understand the essence and recognize the value of the 
various parts of the model and therefore have the freedom 
to tailor how they are implemented to best serve your 
needs. You could build your own application of the GTD 
system from scratch, if need be, with your own tools at 
hand. You are guided by the principle of creating and 
engaging with the necessary orientation “maps” to ensure 


you are appropriately focused as required for a given 
situation. 

You're not at a loss about what to do with anything—a 
business card you collected at a lunch meeting, a 
harebrained idea you woke up with this morning about a 
project you might want to launch, an unexpected private 
invitation to a major gala event, or your blood panel report 
from your last medical checkup. You can create the right 
placeholder for any type of potentially meaningful data. You 
can also easily get a sense of your priorities for an 
upcoming trip; you have everything you need at hand for 
the next webinar you’re conducting; it would take minimal 
effort to pull together a company overview for your bank; 
and you can quickly create a rich context for a family 
conversation about plans for the next two years. You have a 
dynamic, working dashboard that serves your orientation 
for virtually any context, whether at home, at the office, or 
in transit, seamlessly. 


Pressure Produces Greater Rather Than Reduced 
Utilization of These Practices 


One of the most common observations I hear from people 
who have at some point bought into the GTD process but 
have not progressed particularly far with it is that they fell 
away from it because they had an intense series of back-to- 
back business trips, or an extended bout of the flu, or an 
unexpected crisis occur with a major client, or were asked 
to run a major project in addition to their regular job, or... 
and so on. 

And one of the most common things I hear from people 
who have matured with their application of and experience 
with the methodology is that applying Getting Things Done 
is the very thing that enabled them to negotiate these kinds 


of tense situations with much more effectiveness and much 
less stress. 

So, a significant hallmark of progress in the path of 
mastery at this stage is that very transition point when 
issues and opportunities galvanize GTD practices instead of 
causing its users to abandon them. When a new problem 
explodes at work, you can get back in control quickly with a 
new mind sweep instead of taking everything back up into 
your head. You identify desired outcomes, projects, and 
next actions about this circumstance as soon as you Can, as 
opposed to simply worrying about what’s happened. You 
actually do a Weekly Review in the middle of the week 
because you need that kind of elevated focus to recalibrate 
your work, instead of reverting back to latest-and-loudest 
as your priority criterion. 

Operating at this level of GTD mastery is achievable and 
truly elegant. The experience, for those who do achieve it, is 
one of establishing the conditions to flourish. What flourish 
means and looks like for a twenty-four-year-old rock 
musician will likely be very different than for a fifty-four- 
year-old attorney with three kids, but the expanded 
experience and the process of how they got there with GTD 
are identical. 


Postgraduate: Focus, Direction, and 
Creativity 


Once you have incorporated the basic elements of Getting 
Things Done and integrated the more elevated aspects of 
your commitments of life and work into a trusted and 
customized systemic approach, the next frontier opens: 
using clear internal space to optimize your experience, ad 
infinitum. 

This mastery level involves two key aspects: 


e Utilizing your freed-up focus for exploring the more 
elevated aspects of your commitments and values 
e Leveraging your external mind to produce novel value 


Freedom to Engage in the Most Meaningful Things 


Once you really know and trust you can and will execute 
effectively anything that lands in your in-tray, you will have 
the freedom to toss anything into your own in-tray, whether 
it’s your next crazy idea, a possible new technology to 
research, a book you might want to write, or an NGO Web 
site that almost brought you to tears that you’d like to 
support. The power to produce produces powerful 
possibilities = 

And, as I hope I’ve made clear throughout this book, the 
ability to put your attention on the more subtle and 
elevated levels of your life and work to a large degree 
depends on your being able to “put to bed” the inevitably 
necessary more operational and mundane aspects that, 
without your appropriate engagement, can easily distract 
and exhaust your creative focus. 

I applaud the people who can sufficiently 
compartmentalize their consciousness to be able to draft a 
movie script, craft a vision statement for their NGO, or 
write the perfect poem for their wedding vows, with all the 
stuff of unanswered e-mails, crashed computer, taxes to be 
filed, mother-in-law’s complaints about the wedding 
program, and needed bank credit line extension still 
impinging on their psyches. I do know that if all of those 
issues were quieted with appropriate engagement from a 
GTD perspective, the space and inspiration for the more 
creative activities would be tremendously enhanced. The 
negative effect on focus and performance of the cognitive 
load of these kinds of open loops has now been 


documented. Many people attest to their ability to leave 
work at work and drop everything to focus on the creative 
pursuits that interest them, but in my experience that’s only 
because they don’t have a reference point of what their 
lives would be like without that pressure to begin with. 

The lack of pervasive angst about the details of your daily 
life also makes it much easier to shift your attention to the 
direction and qualities of experience that really matter. As I 
indicated in chapter 2, the upper Horizons of Focus—goals, 
vision, purpose, and principles—are the defining criteria for 
your priorities. But most people find the ability to 
concentrate on and execute them effectively elusive at best 
and avoided (and guilt producing!) at worst. A distraction- 
free mind won’t by itself get you to think about wild success 
scenarios five years in the future—you still have to 
consciously direct your attention to those matters—but it 
does make it infinitely easier to engage in such an exercise 
productively. 


Leveraging Your External Mind 


Once you are regularly functioning at this level of mastery, 
the creative thrust of your “GTD-ing” shifts from 
implementing the most effective way of dealing with the 
inputs and inherent demands of your day-to-day world to 
optimally taking advantage of self-created contexts and 
triggers to produce creative ideas, perspectives, and 
actions that wouldn’t normally occur. 


Wouldn't it be great not to have to think too hard about what you 
need to think about? 


For instance, if you have ever needed to purge and bring 
up-to-date a contact manager, as you’ve reviewed old and 
potentially out-of-date entries of people and businesses, 
you’ve invariably come across items that caused you to tell 
yourself, “You know, I really ought to get in touch with her 
again, given what I’m now doing in my business.” If that 
kind of catalyzed thought has ever turned into something in 
any way valuable, then you’ve tasted at least a tiny bit of 
what could be infinitely more utilized. How many more 
ideas could any of us have had today that would have 
potentially added value to some aspect of our relationships, 
work, and creative expressions, had we only brought the 
right things into our conscious focus with the ability to 
capture what might show up? 

This highly creative and productive reflection activity 
automatically occurs in something like the Weekly Review, 
when you are glancing at past and future calendar items 
(“Oh, that reminds me... !”) and updating your Projects 
and Next Actions lists (“Ah ...nowIneedto...!”). 
Regularly reassessing your Someday/ Maybe contents 
offers an even more expansive berth (“You know, I think I 
really am going to take a painting class!”). But how many 
other aspects of your experience and relationships could be 
enhanced with the same kind of triggers for reflection? 
What other contents, reviewed with some consistency, 
might reveal valuable ideas? It’s challenging enough to 
build in regular catch-up behaviors, but the possibilities of 
going beyond them are endless. 

This is the stage of maturity along the GTD path of 
mastery in which the simple idea of checklists takes on 
sublime significance. As cognitive scientists have validated, 
your mind is terrible at recalling things out of the blue, but 
it is fantastic at doing creative thinking about what it has 
directly in front of it to evaluate. When freed from the 
remembering function, the mind is a fabulous mechanism to 


put in play by putting things “in front of the door” so you 
don’t have to think too hard about what to think about. 

How often would you like to be reminded to think about 
your significant family members? What, specifically, would 
be good to remind yourself to think about when you think 
about your partner, your son, your sister? Whom would you 
consider to be on your A-list in your professional network 
(the people whose influence and interactions with you are 
most valuable)? How often should you review that list? 
What affirmations and inspirational writings would serve 
you to reconnect with, and at what intervals? 

There are obviously an infinite number of opportunities 
any of us could take advantage of to add value to our world, 
with the right kind of structure established to relieve our 
psyche of the jobs it does not do well and to leverage what 
it does wonderfully. But that will not happen by itself. It is a 
hallmark of this advanced level of GTD mastery that you 
recognize that dynamic and use your intelligence to 
leverage itself. It’s having the freedom to generate and 
develop ideas, without constraint, and then utilizing the 
practice of processing and organizing those notes and 
thoughts appropriately. It’s the smartest individuals who 
realize they are only randomly in their “smarts” and 
inspired. They’re the ones who intelligently build in systems 
and processes to take advantage of the brilliance that often 
simply lies sleeping behind the dullness required to deal 
with the brutish world we inhabit. 

This path of GTD mastery—incorporating the 
fundamentals, utilizing an elevated and integrated system, 
and leveraging creative directional focus—is not actually as 
limited sequentially as I have laid it out. Most everyone 
manifests aspects and portions of all of these levels in his or 
her own practices, and I have often met novices in some 
field who had some extraordinarily advanced moves. But in 
my experience, when the whole gestalt of stress-free 
productivity is taken into consideration, it requires a solid 


progression that does not have shortcuts. You can’t really 
maintain a sense of week-to-week control if your e-mail is in 
chaos. You won’t really be free to engage with your long- 
range planning or vision if you don’t have a grip on the 
current reality of the actual inventory of your seventy-five 
projects. 

You are continually involved in all of these levels, 
consciously or unconsciously, explicitly or implicitly. You 
have appointments, projects, actions, goals, and values, and 
as a professional you will find that your work has its own set 
of commitments within which you must operate. Your 
mastery of Getting Things Done will simply reflect the 
elegant equanimity with which you are engaged with all of 
them. The unexpected e-mail with the major problem that 
just appeared, your aunt Martha’s birthday this week, the 
potential change in strategy for your company, and the new 
piece of cookware you realize you want—each is dealt with 
quickly, smoothly, and in an appropriate context, leaving 
nothing on your mind other than what’s present in the 
moment. 


Conclusion 


I hope this book has been useful—that you have started to 
reap the rewards of getting more done with less effort and 
stress. And I really hope you have tasted the freedom of a 
“mind like water” and the release of your creative energies 
that can be the result of the application of these techniques. 
Those who begin to implement GTD methods always 
discover there’s more here than meets the eye, and you 
may have already begun to experience your own version of 
that. 

I’m willing to bet that Getting Things Done has validated 
much of what you already know and have been doing to 
some degree in your personal and professional life all along. 
Perhaps, though, this book will make it much easier for you 
to apply that common sense more systematically in a world 
that seems to increasingly confound us with its intensity 
and complexity. 

My intent is not to add more to the plethora of modern 
theories and models about how to be successful. I have 
tried, on the contrary, to define the core methods that don’t 
change with particular fashions, and that, when applied, 
always work. As with gravity, when you understand the 
basic principle, you can operate a lot more effectively, no 
matter what you’re doing. Perhaps this is the leading edge 
of back to basics! 


Getting Things Done is a road map to achieve the 


positive, relaxed focus that characterizes your most 

productive state. I invite you to use it, like a road map, asa 

reference tool to get back there whenever you need to. 
Here are some final tips for moving forward: 


Get your personal physical organization hardware set 
up. 

Get your workstation organized. 

Get in-trays. 

Create a workable and easily accessed personal 
reference system—for work and home. 

Get a good list-management organizer that you are 
inspired to play with. 

Give yourself permission to make any changes that you 
have been contemplating for enhancing your work 
environments. Hang pictures, buy pens, toss stuff, and 
rearrange your workspace. Support your fresh start. 
Set aside time when you can tackle one whole area of 
your office, and then each part of your house. Gather 
everything into your system, and work through the 
Getting Things Done process. 

Share anything of value you’ve gleaned from this with 
someone else. (It’s the fastest way to learn.) 

Review Getting Things Done again in three to six 
months. You'll notice things you might have missed the 
first time through, and I guarantee it will seem like a 
whole new book. 

Stay in touch with people who are broadcasting and 
reflecting these behaviors and standards.~ 


Have a great rest of your life! 


Appendix 


Glossary of Getting Things Done Terms 


The following are terms used throughout the exposition of 
the Getting Things Done methodology. 


actionable—Describes something on which one intends to take action 


action support—A category of physical or digital materials that relate to next 
actions. To be used as reference when taking those actions rather than as 
reminders for action. 


appropriate engagement—The state of being sufficiently OK with 
something’s status to eliminate its pull on one’s attention 


backlog—The inventory of still-unprocessed stuff that has accumulated in 
one’s mind and physical environment 


capture—To gather (and at times generate) items and ideas identified as 
potentially meaningful, about which one has any attention or interest in 
possibly deciding or doing something. See also collect. 


categories—Groupings of similar content items, usually on a list, in a folder 
or file, or in a discrete physical location 


checklist—Any list used to remind one of or to evaluate optional steps, 
procedures to follow, and/or ingredients of an activity (e.g., Travel Checklist; 
Computer Backup Process; Ready-for-School Tasks for kids) 


clarify—To determine exactly the meaning of something that has emerged or 
landed in one’s environment from the capture phase (e.g., “Is there 
something I now need to do about this, and if so, what? Or is it reference? Or 
is it trash? Or is it on hold for later review?”). See also process. 


collect—To group together items and ideas about which some assessment, 
decision, or action is required. See also capture. 


context—The physical or psychological environment within which reminders 
and information are most effectively sorted for access (e.g., when one is at 
home, in a staff meeting, out for errands, at the computer, feeling creative, 
near a phone, having a conversation with a partner, etc.) 


control—One of the two key elements of self- and organizational management 
(along with perspective). Used to refer to having something stable and “under 
control,” rather than attempted manipulation (e.g., having a car, a meeting, or 
the kitchen under control). 


Getting Things Done—Usually referring to the methodology described in 
this book, as in, “Maria was just a beginner at implementing Getting Things 
Done” 


GTD—The acronym for Getting Things Done; the shorthand for referring to 
this methodology 


Horizons of Focus—The discrete levels of commitments we make and 
thoughts we have, personally and/or organizationally 


Ground: Next actions—The things we deal with at the physical, visible 
level of activity, such as e-mails, phone calls, conversations, errands, and 
meetings 


Horizon 1: Projects—Anything we’re committed to finish within the next 
year that requires more than one discrete action step. Includes short-term 
outcomes such as “Repair brake light” and larger-scope projects such as 
“Reorganize Western Region.” The critical inventory of the Weekly Review. 
See also project. 


Horizon 2: Areas of focus and accountability—The segments of our life 
and work that we need to maintain, to ensure stability and health of 
ourselves and our enterprises (e.g., health, finances, customer service, 
strategic planning, family, career) 


Horizon 3: Goals and objectives—The mid- to longer-term outcomes to 
accomplish (usually within three to twenty-four months); e.g., “Finalize 
acquisition of Acme Consulting,” “Establish profitable online version of our 
leadership training course,” “Get Maria’s college plans finalized” 


Horizon 4: Vision—Long-term desired outcomes; ideal scenarios of wild 
success (e.g., “Publish my memoir,” “Take the company public,” “Have a 
vacation home in Provence”) 


Horizon 5: Purpose, principles—Ultimate intention, raison d’étre, and 
core values of a person or enterprise (e.g., “To serve the growth of our 
community in ways that sustainably provide the greatest good for the 
greatest number of our citizens”) 


horizontal thinking—Assessing and managing content across a particular 
equal level (e.g., overviewing all the projects one has, personally and 
professionally) 


incubate—To allow something to remain within a system without a 
commitment to take action yet, but to be reassessed at a later time. Reminders 
are usually held within Someday/Maybe lists, tickler files, or triggered-for- 
later calendar items. 


integrated life-management system—The combination of tools, structures, 
content, and practices used to maintain appropriate engagement with one’s 
world. A workflow, organization, and review process that incorporates every 
aspect of one’s work and life, ensuring a seamless and current inventory of 
commitments, reminders, and information for optimal control and focus 
anywhere, at any time. 


in-tray—A holding bin, either physical or digital, for incoming items still to be 
processed 


map—Any tool for orienting appropriate focus and direction (e.g., a calendar, 
lists of actions and projects, agendas for meetings, strategic plans, job 
descriptions, travel checklist, Weekly Review checklist). See also review. 


natural planning mode!l—The instinctual five-stage thought process our 
minds follow when executing any desired outcome 


next action—The next physical, visible activity that progresses something 
toward completion. It is specific enough so that you know where it happens, 
and with what tools (if any). What “doing” looks like. 


open loop—Anything considered unfinished, which, if inappropriately 
managed, consistently engages one’s mind inefficiently 


organize—To physically, visually, or digitally sort items of similar meaning 
into discrete categories and locations (e.g., a list of phone calls to make, a 
shelf for books to read, a list of projects to complete) 


organized—Where something is matches what it means to you 


orientation maps—Custom lists or reference documents that support 
appropriate engagement with one’s circumstances (e.g., meeting agendas, 
calendars, checklists, action and project lists) 


outcome—A final result, at any level. Usually refers to “desired outcome”— 
i.e. the specifics of a successful conclusion. 


path of GTD mastery—tThe lifelong learning, refining, and adaptation of 
managing one’s life and work. The development and utilization of a 
completely integrated life-management system, dynamically steered, providing 
optimal orientation for any circumstance for the rest of one’s life. 


perspective—One of the two key elements of self- and organizational 
management (along with control). Refers to point of view, focus, altitude of 
horizon. 


predefined work—One’s predetermined actions and projects, reflected in a 
set of lists and reminders, accessible for review and evaluation against 
unplanned and unexpected options 


process—To decide what, exactly, a captured or collected item means, the 
nature of any of its derivatives, and what you intend to do with the results. 
See also clarify. 


productive experience—The condition of being in control, relaxed, focused, 
meaningfully engaged, and fully present. Optimal state for performance and 
experience. 


productivity ecosystem—All potentially meaningful information, 
relationships, and inputs that may trigger one’s attention and direction of 
focus 


project—Any multistep outcome that can be completed within one year. Any 
commitment within that time frame needs to be reviewed at least weekly. See 
also Horizons of Focus: Horizon 1. 


project support—Any collateral materials and information connected to a 
specific project. Can include project plans and any potentially relevant 
reference content. Best organized by project, theme, or topic. 


reflect—To assess contents of any horizon or category of items from a broader 
perspective. See also review. 


review—To analyze appropriate maps on a consistent basis or as needed for 
clarity and focus. See also reflect; map. 


someday/maybe—A common category used to organize projects and actions 
one is committed to review only for potential action at a later date 


stuff—Anything that has appeared in one’s physical or psychological 
environment about which some decision or action is required but which is yet 
undetermined or unorganized 


threefold nature of work—The categories of what we do as we go through 
our day: (1) work we’ve previously defined (actions predetermined); (2) 
unplanned activity; and (3) defining our work (processing inputs) 


tickler file—A physical or digital organizational tool that provides a date- 
related reminder to be assessed only at or beyond a specific future date (also 
referred to as a “perpetual file,” “bring-forward file,” “follow-up file,” or 
“suspense file”) 


total life ecosystem—The contents within the boundary of one’s sensing self. 
The world as one perceives it, one’s situational awareness and correlative 
behavior that may be more or less effective on the scale from physical survival 
to full spiritual presence. 


vertical thinking—Examining and creating multiple levels of content within a 
particular sphere (e.g., planning a project from intended purpose through 
next actions) 


waiting for—Category of expected items pending receipt from other sources 


Weekly Review—The best practice recommended of regrouping at an 
operational level once a week, “bringing up the rear guard,” by getting clean, 


clear, current, and creative to sustain week-to-week control and focus 


weird time—The random and usually small open-time windows that show up 
spontaneously throughout the day, during which one can often still be 


productive by utilizing reminders and material appropriate within that 
framework 


work—Anything one is committed to accomplish that is unfinished 


workflow—The sequence of activities that takes inputs and commitments from 
initiation to completion 


Index 


The page numbers in this index refer to the printed version of this book. To 
find the corresponding locations in the text of this digital version, please use 
the “search” function on your e-reader. Note that not all terms may be 
searchable. 


accountabilities: 
blueprinting areas of, 187-89 
in Horizon 2, 55-56, 215-19, 220-22 
next-action decision-making standard and, 262-63 
Acheson, Dean, 254 
agendas, 150-51 
agreements: 
broken, 244-49 
completing, 246-47 
renegotiating, 247-48 
American Psychological Association, 276 
archives, 175-76 
Aristotle, 179 


Bacon, Francis, xxii 
balancing act, 213-15 
Baumeister, Roy, 278-79 
Bayne, Stephen, 127 
behavior-focused strategies, 281 
Bergson, Henri, 15 
big picture, 9-11, 201-3 
Blake, William, 142 
bottom-up approach, 21-22 
Boulanger, Nadia, 11 
brain, 60 
filtering system in, 70-71 
see also mind 
brainstorming, 60, 61, 64, 72-76, 79-81, 229-30, 272 
keys to, 75-76 
software for, 236-38 
Bronowski, J., 136 
Buddha, 216 
Buzan, Tony, 73 


cabinets, 113 
calendar, 43-45, 94, 145-46 
reflecting and, 193 
someday/maybes and, 180-82 
tickler file, see tickler file 
in Weekly Review, 197 
calls, 148, 191 
Camus, Albert, 202 
capturing, 27-35, 36, 52, 87, 106-21, 142 
amount required, 249-50 
broken agreements and, 244-49 
effects on organizations and relationships, 250-52 
emptying tools regularly, 34-35 
gathering the incompletes, 30-31 
getting things out of your head, 33 
of ideas, methods for, 72-74 
“in” inventory in, 121 
issues about, 109-12 
mind sweep in, 115-20, 255 
minimizing locations for, 34 
negative feelings and, 244-45 
personal benefit of, 244-50 
physical gathering in, 107-15 
power of, 243-52 
success factors for, 33-35 
and things that stay where they are, 108-9 
and throwing away things you might want, 114-15 
time needed for, 106 
tools for, 31-33 
Chartier, Emile, 74 
checklists, 184-90 
and blueprinting areas of work and accountability, 187-89 
examples of topics in, 189 
and identifying projects and action, 186 
of things to pay attention to, 186 
Weekly Review and, 197 
see also lists 
Childre, Doc, 10, 226 
Chisholm, Brock, 260 
Churchill, Winston, 238 
clarifying, 27-29, 35-39, 52, 87, 110, 122-40, 141, 142 
actionable items and, 36-39 
deferring in, 136, 139 
delegation in, 136, 137-38 
emergency scanning vs., 124-25 
identifying next action, 127-39 
identifying projects, 139-40 
natural planning and, 80 


one item at a time in, 125-26 
one-way path in, 126-27 
processing guidelines for, 124-27 
top item first in, 124-25 
two-minute rule in, xii, 134-37 
clarity, 64, 69, 79, 80,97, 144, 157 
next-action decision-making standard and, 261-62 
client information, 168-69, 174-75 
clips, 93 
cognitive science, 25, 275-85 
distributed cognition, 74, 277-78 
flow theory, 279-80 
implementation intentions, 282 
positive psychology, 276-77 
psychological capital, 283-85 
relieving cognitive load of incompletions, 278-79 
self-leadership theory, 280-82 
Cohen, Daniel, 208 
collection tools, 14 
commitments, 13-14 
basic requirements for managing, 14 
complaining, 264-65 
computers, 148, 234 
software, 170, 236-38 
constructive thought pattern strategies, 281 
contact managers, 174-75 
context, 146-53, 193-94, 205-6 
creative sorting of, 206-7 
Cooper, James Fenimore, 50 
countertops, 113 
Covey, Stephen, 214 
Cryer, Bruce, 10 
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 280 


decision catalysts, 181-82 
decoration, 108-9 
deferring, 136, 139 
delegation, 136, 137-38 
of projects, 165 
desk drawers, 109, 112-13 
desktop, 112 
digital technology, xvi-xvii, 233-34 
computers, 148, 234 
integration of, 32-33 
paper vs., 235-36 
software, 170, 236-38 
distributed cognition, 74, 277-78 


Drucker, Peter, 5, 16, 194 
dumbing down, intelligent, 259-61 
Dyson, Freeman, 36 


easels, 233, 234n 
Einstein, Albert, 45, 69 
e-mail, 32, 33, 35, 121, 273 
project organization and, 170 
e-mail-based workflow, 156-58 
emergency scanning, 124-25 
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, xxvi, 16 
empowerment, 264-65, 273 
energy, 208-9, 253, 259, 268 
engaging, 27-29, 51-57, 204-26 
context in, 205-6 
creative context sorting in, 206-7 
and energy available, 208-9 
four-criteria model for choosing actions in the moment, 52-53, 205-10 
moment-to-moment balancing act and, 213-15 
priorities and, 210, 225-26 
six-level model for reviewing your own work, 54-57, 215-16 
threefold model for evaluating daily work, 53-54, 210-15 
three models for making action choices, 52-57 
and time available, 208 
equipment, 108-9, 114 
errands, 149 
event participation, 181 


fast track, 266-67 

file folders, 94, 98, 144-45, 234 
creating, 101 
labeling, 102-3 
for projects, 170-71 
for tickler system, 183-84 

files, filing, 48-49, 234-35 
alpha system in, 100-101 
critical factor of, 97-98 
discrete, 97 
general reference, 42, 48-49, 97, 100, 173 
large-category, 173-74 
purging of, 103 
storage space for, 101-2 
as success factor in itself, 103-4 
success factors for, 99-103 
tickler, see tickler file 

floors, 113-14 

flow theory, 279-80 


focus, 55-56, 69-71, 295-99 
areas of (Horizon 2), 55-56, 215-19, 220-22, 296 
fast track and, 266-67 
project lists and, 160 
on values, 245n 
see also outcome focusing 
forgiveness, 248 
Forster, E. M., 233 
four-criteria model for choosing actions in the moment, 52-53, 205-10 
Francis of Assisi, Saint, 264 
Frost, Robert, 206 
Fulghum, Robert, 132, 254 
furniture and fixtures, 114 


George, David L., 87 
“Getting Things Done: The Science Behind Stress-Free Productivity” 
(Heylighen and Vidal), 277, 278 
Gibbon, Edward, 10 
Gleeson, Kerry, 17 
glossary of terms, 303-8 
goals, 56, 201, 215-19, 222-23, 224 
implementation intentions and, 282 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 271 
Gollwitzer, Peter M., 282 
Great Recession, 7n 
ground level (current actions), 55, 215-19 
GTD (Getting Things Done), xvin 
cognitive science and, see cognitive science 
digital technology and, xvi-xvii 
globalization of methodology used in, xviii-xix 
as inclusive of large population, xix-xx 
time and energy required for, xx-xxii 
tips for moving forward in, 300-301 
24-7 world and, xvii-xviii 
GTD mastery, 286-99 
assessing and populating your projects list from your area of focus, 293 
of basics, 288-90 
external mind in, 297-99 
and freedom to engage in meaningful things, 295-97 
functional awareness in, 293 
getting off track and back on, 289-90 
integrated life management, 290-95 
postgraduate (focus, direction, and creativity), 295-99 
pressure and, 294-95 
and projects as heartbeat of operational system, 292-93 
three tiers of, 287-88 


Harris, Sydney J., 270 
Hatfield, J. A., xxv 
Havel, Vaclav, 22 
Hock, Dee, 68 
Hoffer, Eric, 7 
“hold and review” files and piles, 179-80 
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 144 
home, 89, 90, 150 
Hoover, Herbert, 269 
hope, 283-84 
Horace, 18 
Horizons of Focus, 296 
ground level (current actions), 55, 215-19 
Horizon 1 (current projects), 49, 215-19, 219-20 
Horizon 2 (areas of focus and accountabilities, 55-56, 215-19, 220-22, 296 
Horizon 3 (goals), 56, 201, 215-19, 222-23 
Horizon 4 (vision), 56, 201, 215-19, 222-23 
Horizon 5 (purpose and principles), 56-57, 201, 215-19, 222-23 
horizontal action management, 22-23, 27, 58, 227 
Hubbard, Elbert, 38 


implementation, 85-105 
setting aside time, 87-88, 104-5 
setting up space, 88-91 
tools for, see tools 
implementation intentions, 282 
incompletions: 
gathering, 30-31 
relieving cognitive load of, 278-79 
triggers, 116-20 
incubation, 46-47, 129-30 
information gathering, 230 
integrated life management, 290-95 
integrity, 243, 246, 247 
intelligent dumbing down, 259-61 
in-trays, 32-35, 109-10, 121, 251-52, 254, 273 
LIFO vs. FIFO approach to, 125 


Jobs, Steve, xiv 
John-Roger, 55 
Johnson, Samuel, 269 


Kanter, Rosabeth Moss, 227 
karate, 12 

Kekich, David, xxvii, 201 
Kempton, Sally, 25 
Kennedy, John F., 263 


knowledge work, 5, 11, 16-17, 255n 
Kozol, Jonathan, 223 
Kumaris, Brahma, 31 


labeler, 93, 102-3 

La Bruyere, Jean de, 152 

Lambert, Craig, 11-12 

Landers, Ann, 110 

LeFevre, Judith, 280 

Leonardo da Vinci, 200 

Levitin, Daniel, 277 

libraries, 175-76 

Lin Yutang, 74 

Lippmann, Walter, 27 

lists, 19-20, 39, 111, 144-45 
agenda, 151 
checklists, see checklists 
digital managers for, 153n 
incompletion triggers, 116-20 
next actions, 45 
project, see project lists 
read/review, 152 
someday/maybe, 46-47, 177-79 
to-do, 9, 19-20, 44, 146 
of “waiting for” items, 153-54, 197 

location-based reminders, 149n 


Maltz, Maxwell, 70 
Managing action, 20-26 
horizontal methods of, 22-23, 27, 58, 227 
as prime challenge, 20-21 
vertical methods of, 22-23, 58-59, 227, 238 
Manz, Charles C., 280-81 
martial arts, 11, 12 
Maslow, Abraham, 276 
McGriffy, Michael, 44 
meetings, 230, 273 
Mills, C. Wright, 98 
mind, 18, 23n, 277 
external, xii, 277-78, 297-99 
getting things out of, 23-26, 33, 121 
natural planning in, 60-62, 65 
reasons for things to be on, 17 
short-term-memory part of, 24-25 
sweep of, 115-20, 255 
water simile and, 11, 12, 106, 279, 286 
mind mapping, 72, 73, 236, 238 


Mind Over Water (Lambert), 11-12 
moment-to-moment balancing act, 213-15 
Montaigne, Michel Eyquem de, 33 
Moore’s Law, xvi 

Mowrer, O. H., 86 

multilevel outcome management, 270-71 
multitasking, 126 

mundane tasks, 269-70 

Myer, Rochelle, 64 


natural reward strategies, 281 

Neck, Christopher P,, 280-81 

negative feelings, 244-45, 259 

next-action decisions, 60, 62, 77-79, 127-39, 253-65, 268 
accountability and, 262-63 
as acquired practice, 254-55 
categories of, 43-45 
clarity and, 261-62 
and creating the option of doing, 255-57 
empowerment and, 264-65 
intelligent dumbing down and, 259-61 
as operational standard, 253, 261-65 
procrastination and, 257-61 
productivity and, 263 
source of technique, 254-55 

no, saying, 246 

Nordenholt, George F., 259 

notebooks, 171, 234, 235 

note taking, 32-33 


Oettingen, Gabrielle, 282 
office, 90, 149-50 
open loops, 14, 18, 23n-24n, 30, 31 
optimism, 283-84 
Organized Mind, The (Levitin), 277 
organizations: 
capture habit in, 250-52 
cultures of, 252, 272-74 
organizers, 95-97, 111 
organizing, 27-29, 36, 39-49, 52, 64, 141-90, 230 
of action reminders, 145-58 
agendas in, 150-51 
basic categories in, 142-45 
basics of, 77 
calendar in, 43-45, 145-46 
calls in, 148 
checklists in, see checklists 


computer tasks in, 148 
contact managers and, 174-75 
context categories in, 146-53 
and dispersing action reminders, 158 
of e-mail-based workflow, 156-58 
errands in, 149 
folders for, 144-45 
home tasks in, 150 
incubation and, 46-47, 129-30 
of libraries and archives, 175-76 
lists for, 19-20, 144-45 
in natural planning, 60, 61, 76-77 
next-action categories in, 43-45 
of nonactionable data, 171-84 
nonactionable items in, 45-49 
office tasks in, 149-50 
original items as action reminders in, 154-58 
of paper-based workflow, 154-56 
of projects, see project lists; projects 
purging and, 110-11 
read/review items in, 151-53, 156, 179-80 
of reference materials, 48-49, 130-31, 172-76; see also files, filing 
of someday/maybes, see someday/maybes 
tickler file in, see tickler file 
traditional models of, 8-9 
trash and, 46, 128-29 
“waiting for” items in, 153-54 
outcome focusing, 266-74 
and mastering the mundane, 269-70 
multilevel, 270-71 
and power of natural planning, 271-72 
and shifting to positive organizational culture, 272-74 
significance of, 267-69 
outcome/vision, 56, 60, 61, 65, 69-72, 201, 215-19, 222-23 
outlining applications, 236-37 
Ovid, 231 


paper, 32, 93, 232 
digital technology vs., 235-36 
paper-based workflow, 154-56 
paper-holding trays, 92-93 
Pauling, Linus, 72 
pens, 232 
planning, 58-82 
amount needed, 79-81 
formal and structured tools for, 59 
reactive, 64-65 


unnatural, 63-64, 75 
planning, natural, 60-63 
brainstorming in, see brainstorming 
dinner example of, 60-62 
five phases of, 65-77 
information gathering and, 230 
meetings and, 230 
need for, 227 
next actions in, see next-action decisions 
as not normal, 62-63 
organizing in, 60, 61, 76-77 
power of, 271-72 
principles in, 60, 68-69 
purpose in, 60, 65-68 
steps in, 229-30 
support structures for, 234-38 
tips and techniques for, 227-39 
tools for, 231-34 
vision/outcome in, 56, 60, 61, 65, 69-72, 201, 215-19, 222-23 
what projects to plan, 228-31 
see also projects 
positive psychology, 276-77 
Post-its, 93 
principles, 60, 68-69 
in Horizon 5, 56-57, 201, 215-19, 222-23 
priorities, 210, 225-26 
problems, 163, 273, 294-95 
process, meaning of, 124 
procrastination, 257-61 
productivity, 13, 253, 267, 273 
next-action decision-making standard and, 263 
project lists, 41, 140, 159-67, 222 
assessing and populating, 293 
control and focus facilitated by, 160 
finalizing, 219-20 
number of, 164 
relationship management and, 161 
tensions alleviated by, 160-61 
value of, 159-61 
Weekly Review and, 161, 166 
projects, 41-42, 159-71 
ad hoc, 169-71 
attached notes for, 169-70 
current activities and, 161 
deciding on, 228-31 
delegated, 165 
e-mail and software applications for, 170, 236-38 
as heartbeat of operational system, 292-93 


higher-horizon interests and commitments and, 162-63 
Horizon 1 and, 49, 215-19, 219-20 
identifying, 139-40 
long-term, 263n 
notebooks for, 171, 234, 235 
paper-based files for, 170-71 
personal vs. professional, 164-65 
problems, issues, and opportunities and, 163-64 
random, 231 
reassessing, 178 
subprojects, 166-67 
subsorting, 164-65 
support materials for, 42, 167-69 
support structures for, 234-38 
tools for, 231-34 
triggers for activating, 180 
types of, 165 
uncovering, 161-64 
Weekly Review and, 197 
see also planning, natural 
psychological capital (PsyCap), 283-85 
purging, 110-11 
purpose, 60, 65-68 
in Horizon 5, 56-57, 201, 215-19, 222-23 


Raeder, Bill, 19 
Rand, Ayn, 193 
read/review items, 151-53, 156, 179-80 
recycling bin, 94-95 
reference materials, 108-9, 130-31, 172-76 
systems for, 172-76 
see also files, filing 
reflecting, 27-29, 49-51, 52, 191-203 
action lists in, 193 
bigger picture and, 9-11, 201-3 
calendar in, 193 
context and, 193-94 
horizon areas in, 49 
and updating system, 194 
Weekly Review in, see Weekly Review 
what to look at and when, 49-50, 192-94 
relationships, capture habit and, 250-52 
resilience, 283-84 
reticular activating system, 70 
review, see reflecting 
Rogers, Will, 64, 81 
rubber bands, 93 


Saffo, Paul, 198 
Santayana, George, 65 
Schwab, Charles, 216 
science, see cognitive science 
Scientific American, 70 
self-efficacy, 283-84 
self-leadership theory, 280-82 
Seligman, Martin, 276 
Shaw, George Bernard, 264 
shelves, 113-14 
six-level model for reviewing your own work, 54-57, 215-16 
skepticism, xxviii 
Snyder, Steven, 268 
software, 170, 236-38 
someday/maybes, 176-84, 263n 
calendar for, 180-82 
“hold and review” files and, 179-80 
lists of, 46-47, 177-79 
special categories of, 178-79 
Weekly Review and, 198 
space, 88-91 
at home, 89, 90, 150 
office, 90, 149-50 
sharing of, 90-91 
stapler, 93 
Sterner, Thomas, xxi 
stuff, 18-20, 36-38, 106, 172, 260 
workflow diagram for, 37, 40, 123, 143 
supplies, 108-9 
support materials for projects, 42, 167-69 
Suzuki, Shunryu, 13 


tape, 93 
texting, 32 
thinking tools, 231-32 
threefold model for evaluating daily work, 53-54, 210-15 
tickler file, 46, 47, 182-84 
setting up, 183-84 
time: 
available, 208 
setting aside for implementing process, 87-88, 104-5 
traditional models for managing, 8-9, 249 
to-do lists, 9, 19-20, 44, 146 
Toffler, Alvin, 58 
Tomlin, Lily, 71 
tools, 92-104, 231-34 
basic processing, 92-97 


digital, see digital technology 
easels, 233, 234n 
filing, see file folders; files, filing 
thinking, 231-32 
whiteboards, 233-34 
writing, 32, 232 

trash, 46, 128-29 

tricks, 85-86 

Twain, Mark, 256, 258 

two-minute rule, xii, 134-37 


values, 10, 245n 

Van Doren, Mark, 3 

vertical action management, 22-23, 58-59, 227, 238 
vision, 56, 60, 61, 65, 69-72, 201, 215-19, 222-23 


“waiting for” items, 153-54 
Weekly Review and, 197 
walls, 113-14 
wastebasket, 94-95 
Weekly Review, 50-51, 161, 166, 194-201 
defined, 195 
executive operational, 200-201 
getting clear in, 195-96 
getting creative in, 195, 197-99 
getting current in, 195, 196-97 
time and place for, 199-201 
whiteboards, 233-34 
Whitehead, Alfred North, 185 
Willpower (Baumeister and Tierney), 279 
Wilson, Desmond, 248 
Woodruff, Julia Louise, 247 
work, 250 
changes in, 6-8 
defining, 4n 
knowledge, 5, 11, 16-17, 255n 
lack of clear boundaries in, 5-6 
workspace, see space 
writing instruments: 
paper and pads, 32, 232 
pens, 232 


zone, 11, 250, 279 


An invitation... 


The David Allen Company provides training, coaching, assessment, and 
consulting programs that continue to serve many of the global Fortune 
100 organizations, small and medium-size businesses, and a vast array 
of creative individuals worldwide. Our Academy is the source of the best 
practices of the Getting Things Done methodology and offers 
certification programs and a forum for a worldwide community of 
professionals, dedicated to ensuring consistent top-quality education 
through all of our certified global trainers, coaches and partners. 


¢ Could you use more in-depth coaching and training to 
install, implement, maintain, and leverage these practices 
for yourself personally and/or professionally? 


e Are you interested in connecting and engaging with a global 
community of people who have embodied and endorsed this 
methodology both personally and professionally? 


e Are you part of an organization that could benefit from these 
practices? 


e Would you simply like to get immediate tips and inspiration 
for gaining greater control and perspective with the least 
amount of effort? 


e If “yes” to any of the above, explore the wide range of 
products and services on our Web site and feel free to 
communicate with us directly. 


e At whatever level you choose to participate, we at the David 
Allen Company welcome you into our dynamic global 
community of GTD practitioners. It doesn’t take much 
involvement with this material to make a lot of difference— 
for yourself and the world around you. Stay engaged, and 
stay in touch. 


gettingthingsdone.com 
info@ gettingthingsdone.com 


AVAILABLE FROM PENGUIN BOOKS 


MAKING IT ALL WORK 


WINNING AT THE GAME OF WORK 
AND THE BUSINESS OF LIFE 


DAVID ALLEN 





WINNING AT THE 
GAME OF WORK AND 
THE BUSINESS OF LIFE 


oo 





PENGUIN 
BOOKS 


Since its publication in 2001, Getting 
Things Done became “the defining 
self-help business book” of the 
decade. Having inspired millions of 
readers around the world, it clearly 
spoke to an urgent need in an 
increasingly time-pressured society. 
In the sequel, Making It All Work, 
Allen unlocks the full power of his 
methods across the entire span of 
life and work. Making It All Work is 
an invaluable road map, providing 
both bearings to help you determine 
where you are in life and directions 
on how to get to where you want 


to go. 


AVAILABLE FROM PENGUIN BOOKS 


READY FOR ANYTHING 


52 PRODUCTIVITY PRINCIPLES 
FOR GETTING THINGS DONE 


READY 


Ko) ma alaliare, 
52 


Productivity 
Principles for 


Getting Things Done 





MM 


NATIONAL 
BESTSELLER 


~ 4 
David Allen 


Bestselling Author of 
GETTING THINGS DONE 
and MAKING IT ALL WORK 


“The personal productivity guru.” 
—Fast Company 





PENGUIN 
BOOKS 


Based on David Allen’s highly 
popular e-newsletter, Ready for 
Anything offers readers 52 ways to 
immediately focus your attention, 
create structures that work, and take 
action to get things moving. With 
wit, inspiration, and know-how, Allen 
shows readers how to make things 
happen—with less effort and stress, 
and lots more energy, creativity, and 
effectiveness. Ready for Anything is the 
perfect book for anyone wanting to 
work and live at his or her very best. 


Penguin 
Random House 
PENGUIN PUBLISHING GROUP 





What’s next on 
your reading list? 


Discover your next 
sreat read! 


Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this 
author. 


Sign up now. 


*“GTD” (Getting Things Done abbreviated) has become the popular acronym 
around the world for the methodology I describe in this book. This edition 
uses it frequently as shorthand. 


*As I write this, Iam in the middle of a move to Europe from the U.S., 
attempting to reduce my physical possessions to a bare minimum. So I 
scanned and digitized everything in my physical tickler file (which I have used 
for thirty years, described on page 182). Already I’ve been frustrated several 
times with things that would have been much more easily handled had I kept 
the physical version! 


*An excellent resource in this area is Charles Duhigg’s book, The Power of 
Habit. 


*I consider “work,” in its most universal sense, to mean anything that you 
want or need to be different than it currently is. Many people make a 
distinction between “work” and “personal life,” but I don’t: To me, weeding 
the garden or updating my will is just as much “work” as writing this book or 
coaching a client. All the methods and techniques in this book are applicable 
across that life-work spectrum—to be effective, they need to be. 


*The Great Recession, early in this century, added to the uncertainties by 
creating the need for many to keep working after traditional retirement ages, 
often requiring the discovery of some other way to make money. 


*“Knowledge work” may seem an unfamiliar concept to many in this century, 
simply because so much of our lives now incorporates so many nonphysical 
and nonobvious things we need to decide, demanding constant thinking and 
choices. Most of us are in it all the time (the last thing a fish notices is water). 
But the realization of the thinking process itself that we must be applying is 
not explicitly realized or exercised yet by most. Knowledge work may seem an 
idea limited to white-collar professionals. That was the initial population in 
the past century that dealt with this, but anyone who has moved out of mere 
survival mode finds himself or herself in this game. Any parent who has ever 
wondered what class to choose for a child or what digital device to give him or 
her is in this category. 


*See Baumeister’s validating research, referenced in chapter 14. 


*Not exactly everything. Much of the time my mind is simply “grazing” — 
noticing or thinking about things, and potentially maturing my awareness 
about something or other. I’m not writing down thousands of thoughts I have 
during the day. Almost all are complete in themselves. It’s the ones that create 
some open loop in my psyche—a restaurant I read about I might want to try, 
an idea for possible content for the revision of this book, something I thought 
of that I want to do for my wife, a question I have for my accountant, 
something to get at the hardware store, etc. 


*An excellent book that covers this topic (and many others) is Willpower: 
Rediscovering the Greatest Human Strength, by Roy Baumeister and John 
Tierney (Penguin, 2011). 


*If, however, you were handling the celebration for your best friend’s recent 
triumph, the complexity and detail that might accrue in your head should 
warrant at least the back of an envelope! 


*You can also plan nonactionable projects and not need a next action—for 
example, designing your dream house. The lack of a next action by default 
makes it a “someday/maybe” project... and that’s fine for anything of that 
nature. 


*After-hours is actually a good time to crank through a group of similar tasks 
that you wouldn’t normally do in the course of your typical workday, like filing 
a big backlog of papers, cleaning a desk drawer, surfing the Web about your 
upcoming vacation, or processing expense receipts. 


*In many countries it is difficult to find simple, inexpensive folders for the 
elementary but necessary general-reference system I advocate. You may have 
to improvise to find something workable. 


*Since the original publication of Getting Things Done, scores of software 
programs have emerged using the core GTD methodology as a basis for their 
models. Most are simply digital and mobile to-do and task list managers, with 
a variety of enhancements, connections, and graphic views. 


*A great time to do this is Christmas Eve day, or some similar near-holiday 
that falls on a workday. Most people are in “party mode” anyway, so it’s an 
ideal opportunity to get funky and clean house. 


*If you have previously implemented some version of the GTD methodology 
and have action and project lists set up, but the contents are not current and 
sufficiently active, you are usually better off printing them out, putting them 
back in your in-tray to use as raw input again, and starting anew. You don’t 
want to be refreshing a new version of your system with outdated material 
inside. 


*Obsessive-compulsive hoarding is another matter, and a condition to be dealt 
with outside the scope of this methodology and my expertise. 


*Many people (even those who are high-tech oriented), once they experience 
the value of writing a single thought on a single piece of paper, have made it 
part of their ongoing self-management practice. It’s great to give your 
potentially meaningful thoughts their due! 


*One of your extra stack trays is ideal for this purpose. Use it temporarily 
during this initial processing to gather things to organize later. Afterward you 
can use it to hold pending work-in-progress papers and physical reminders of 
next actions. 


*One thrust in personal productivity technology (to some degree precipitated 
by the popularity of this GTD methodology) is the development of location- 
based reminders. Your mobile device will sense (given your GPS reading) that 
you are at a hardware store, or at home, or downtown, and it will then alert 
you to actions tied to that physical environment. This makes sense in 
principle, but in practice, with all the variables involved and the desirability to 
overview our total inventory of actions from multiple angles, these will only be 
useful as a nice option to add to a rigorously managed list, as part of a totally 
reviewed and integrated system. Assuming this will keep your head clear and 
not miss something you’d want to see is still quite overoptimistic about that 
technology and its usage. 


*I use Agenda in the U.S./American meaning—items to cover with someone or 
in a meeting (vs. “calendar,” “schedule,” or “diary” in other cultures). 


*Digital list managers (as well as low-tech papers in separate folders) have an 
advantage here because they let you easily move an item from one category to 
another as the action changes, without your having to rewrite or rethink 
anything. 


*This approach can be dangerous, however, if you don’t put those “Bills to 
Pay” or “Receipts to Process” in front of your face as consistently as you 
should. Just having them “organized” isn’t sufficient to get them off your mind 


—you’ve also got to trust that you will appropriately review and deal with 
them. 


*If you happen to have a lifestyle that seldom has more than one screenful of 
un-dealt-with e-mails at any one time, simply keeping them there as a 
reminder of your work at hand would probably suffice. As soon as the volume 
expands to something you can’t see at a glance, then organizing them outside 
your “in” area makes much more sense. 


*Some e-mail applications allow you to move or connect your e-mails into a 
Task list or area, which can work equally well. It will require, however, getting 
sufficiently familiar with that function within the software to make it easy and 
seamless. 


*As I write this, I’m in the throes of moving from California to Europe. For 
many months, I maintained one project on my Projects list: “Move to 
Amsterdam.” Last week, as things became more immediate and necessary to 
deal with on multiple fronts, I unpacked that one project into fifteen—all of 
which I need to keep my eyes on weekly now, ranging from “Set up Dutch 
bank accounts” to “Finalize artwork storage in Santa Barbara.” 


*Software technology will continue to advance the automation of workflow, 
with CRMs and other applications programmed to trigger action reminders, 
etc. In theory this would reduce the need for individual tracking of such 
items. In practice, each person still must engage with the work he or she is 
accountable for, generated by the software, and managing that within his or 
her holistic system. Additionally, the variables in our engagements and their 
activities are often so subtle and fast changing, even the most sophisticated 
technology will fall short of being totally trusted for such detailed direction in 
the foreseeable future. 


*As a bit of a foodie, I have kept track of any restaurant around the world I 
might want to patronize (from experience or referrals). It’s in a software 
application that allows me to look under, for example, “Locales—London— 
Restaurants” and see my list. Just that one topic, restaurants I might want to 
visit, populates hundreds of folders and subfolders on my computer. 


*If you are using a group-accessible calendar, you obviously must maintain 
discretion about those kinds of triggers. Digital calendars usually have 
“private” categorization functions you can use for entries you don’t 
necessarily want everyone to see. 


mou 


*Also referred to as a “Suspense,” “bring forward, 
up” file. 


perpetual,” or “follow- 


*A powerful exposition of this function and its value (and the costs of not 
paying attention to it!) was laid out in Atul Gawande’s book The Checklist 
Manifesto: How to Get Things Right (Metropolitan Books, 2009). 


*This is especially true if other people have authority to add entries to your 
calendar. It’s very easy to be uncomfortably surprised with meetings you 
suddenly notice that were scheduled by someone else! 


*There are myriad ways to give it all up. You can ignore the physical world 
and its realities and trust in the universe. I did that at one point, in my own 
particular way, and it was a powerful experience. And one I wouldn’t wish on 
anyone. I tried to check out of my practical connections, though I didn’t 
choose to end my life (but it was a close call!). I had much to learn about 
cooperating with the world I’d chosen to play in. But surrendering to your 
inner awareness, and its intelligence and advice for the worlds you live in, is 
the higher ground. Trusting yourself and the source of your intelligence is the 
most elegant version of experiencing freedom and manifesting personal 
productivity. 


*In an ideal world, you could see all your next-action reminders any way you 
wanted to see them: time, brain-power, location, or tool required; emotional 
payoff; area of life served; goals and projects supported. The issue is: How 
much structure is too much, for the potential value of it? If you have to think 
and work too much to input content into your system, you won’t do it. The 
digital applications for list and category management increasingly give us 
more opportunities to slice and dice our information in multiple new ways, but 
care must always be taken to evaluate if the energy required to utilize the 
system in the “heat of battle” is worth it. (You could have created this context- 
specific sorting functionality since the first software spreadsheet programs 
were introduced, by structuring columns and building sorting macros. But do 
I need to go through all that just to insert “Call my brother” as a reminder?!) 


*Granted, it’s a fine line between something that doesn’t require a lot of 
energy because it’s the most productive thing to do in the moment and doing 
it to avoid doing the tougher stuff you know you ought to be doing! 


*This is very likely one reason someone may resist the acceptance and 
implementation of the Getting Things Done methodology. Some of those 
higher-horizon issues, which consequently may surface, would be too 
unpleasant to confront. Being busy and overwhelmed can be, paradoxically, at 
least a temporarily effective way to stay comfortable. 


*A great use of the camera function in smartphones is to snap pictures of 
whiteboard and easel-pad thinking, so that can be erased for further 
brainstorming and the results channeled back to the participants for whatever 
use they might want to make of it. 


*What if paper was just discovered? Wow! Something that allows you a visual 
map of your digital information, which you can manipulate and communicate 
physically and visually? And something that can capture, facilitate, and share 
creative thinking, without batteries or electricity? Wow. 


*It has been a popular concept in the self-help world that focusing on your 
values will simplify your life. I contend the opposite: the overwhelming 
amount of things that people have to do comes from their values. Values are 
critical elements for meaning and direction and decision making. But don’t 
kid yourself—the more you focus on them, the more things you’re likely to feel 
responsible for taking action on. Your values make it easier for you to make 
choices, but don’t think they will make things any simpler. 


*I am tempted, but hesitant, to use the word skill in this case. We all already 
have the ability to make a next-action decision. We do it all the time, 
thousands of times a day, but mostly unconsciously. Yet making that decision 
before we have to about things we’re committed to move on is a powerful and 
elegant cognitive behavior pattern that can be learned, practiced, and 
integrated. It is a core element of “knowledge-work athletics.” And most 
people don’t do it in that manner, about even the most important things in 
their lives. 


*One of the biggest productivity leaks I have seen in some organizations is the 
lack of next actions determined for long-term projects. Long-term does not 
mean “someday/maybe.” Those projects with distant goal lines are still to be 
done as soon as possible; long-term simply means “more action steps until it’s 
done,” not “no need to decide next actions because the day of reckoning is so 
far away.” When every project and open loop in an organization is being 
monitored, it’s a whole new ball game. 


*An interesting phenomenon I have noticed more than once is that for some 
highly energetic people, incorporating the Getting Things Done mind-set 
turbocharges their busy and creative lifestyle to a new level of discomfort 
(“Now I can really get a lot more done, and faster!”), and they then take the 
opportunity for healthy self-examination about how important that really is 
versus more quality-of-life kinds of outcomes they may crave. 


*Francis Heylighen and Clément Vidal, “Getting Things Done: The Science 
Behind Stress-Free Productivity,” Long Range Planning 41, no. 6 (2008): 585- 
605. 


*The Organized Mind: Thinking Straight in the Age of Information Overload, 
Daniel J. Levitin (New York: Dutton, 2014). 


*Heylighen’s background and expertise is in analyzing insect behavior—how 
relatively brainless creatures produce phenomenally effective results. He 
makes a fascinating case for us humans to do likewise, with Getting Things 
Done as a key platform. 


*Roy F Baumeister and E. J. Masicampo, “Unfulfilled Goals Interfere with 
Tasks That Require Executive Functions,” Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology 47, no. 2 (2011): 300-11. 


*Roy FE. Baumeister and E. J. Masicampo, “Consider It Done! Plan Making Can 
Eliminate the Cognitive Effects of Unfulfilled Goals,” Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology 101, no. 4 (2011): 667-83. 


*Roy F. Baumeister and John Tierney, Willpower: Discovering the Greatest 
Human Strength (New York: Penguin Press, 2011). 


*Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience (New 
York: Harper Perennial, 1990). 


*M. Csikszentmihalyi and J. LeFevre, “Optimal Experience in Work and 
Leisure,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 56, no. 5 (1989): 815- 
22. 


*Clive Fullagar and E. Kevin Kelloway, “Work-Related Flow,” in A Day in the 
Life of a Happy Worker, ed. Arnold B. Bakker and Kevin Daniels (New York: 
Psychology Press, 2013), 41-57. 


*Christopher P. Neck and Charles C. Manz, Mastering Self-Leadership: 
Empowering Yourself for Personal Excellence, 6th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Prentice-Hall, 2012), 192. 


*Peter M. Gollwitzer and Gabrielle Oettingen, “Planning Promotes Goal 
Striving,” in Kathleen D. Vohs and Roy F. Baumeister, eds., Handbook of Self- 


Regulation: Research, Theory, and Applications, 2nd ed. (New York: Guilford, 
2011), 162-85. 


*F Luthans, B. J. Avolio, J. B. Avey, and S. M. Norman, “Positive Psychological 
Capital: Measurement and Relationship with Performance and Satisfaction,” 
Personnel Psychology 60, no. 3 (2007): 541-72. 


*T. Sun, X. W. Zhao, L. B. Yang, and L. H. Fan, “The Impact of Psychological 
Capital on Job Embeddedness and Job Performance Among Nurses: A 


Structural Equation Approach,” Journal of Advanced Nursing 68, no. 1 (2012): 
69-79, doi:10.1111/j.1365 -2648.2011.05715.x. 


*J. B. Avey, EF Luthans, R. M. Smith, and N. F Palmer, “Impact of Positive 
Psychological Capital on Employee Well-being Over Time,” Journal of 
Occupational Health Psychology 15, no. 1 (2010): 17-28, 
doi:10.1037/a0016998. 


*One of my favorite sayings is, “The better you get, the better you’d better 
get!” The more confidence you have that you can actually manifest things 
before you have all the knowledge and resources you might need, the more 
you can potentially overwhelm yourself with your own possibilities. So the 
clarity and confidence that your GTD practices allow simultaneously demand 
their ongoing utilization. 


*We’re available. Visit www.gettingthingsdone.com anytime for tons of free 

support material, conversations and stories about these best practices from 
people like you, current information about supportive products and services, 
and access to our global network of people sharing in this methodology.  design as it is in 
its content, this bold volume outlines the laws 
of power in their unvarnished essence, 
synthesising the philosophies of Machiavclli. 
Sun-tzu, Carl von Clausewitz, and other great 
thinkers. Some laws require prudence (“Law 
1: Never Outshine the Master"), some stealth 
(“Law 3: Conceal Your Intentions"), and 
some the total absence of mercy (“Law 15: 
Crush Your Enemy Totally"), but like it or 
not, all have applications in real-life 
situations. Illustrated through the tactics of 
Queen Elizabeth I. Henry Kissengcr, I* T 
Barnum, and other famous figures who have 
wielded - or been victimised by - power, 
these laws will fascinate any reader interested 
in gaining, observing or defending against 
ultimate control. 

